
       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: Every effort has been made to replicate this text as
faithfully as possible; please see detailed list of printing issues at
the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Illustration: ASHLEY DOWN ORPHAN HOUSES, BRISTOL, ENG.]


THE LIFE OF TRUST:

    BEING A

NARRATIVE OF THE LORD'S DEALINGS

    WITH

GEORGE MÜLLER, WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.


  EDITED AND CONDENSED BY
  REV. H. LINCOLN WAYLAND,
  PASTOR OF THE THIRD BAPTIST CHURCH, WORCESTER, MASS.

  With an Introduction

      BY

  FRANCIS WAYLAND.

  BOSTON:
  GOULD AND LINCOLN,
  59 WASHINGTON STREET.
  NEW YORK: SHELDON AND COMPANY.
  CINCINNATI: GEORGE S. BLANCHARD.

  1861.


  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by
  GOULD AND LINCOLN,

  In the Clerk's office of the District Court
  of the District of Massachusetts.

  STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
  GEO. C. RAND AND AVERY, 3 CORNHILL.


       *       *       *       *       *




EDITOR'S PREFACE.


Having been requested by MESSRS. GOULD AND LINCOLN to examine the work
entitled "A NARRATIVE OF SOME OF THE LORD'S DEALINGS WITH GEORGE
MÜLLER," the Editor was convinced that its republication in this country
would greatly promote the piety of American Christians. But to reproduce
the work in its original form was attended with difficulty. The
"Narrative," in four parts, (published respectively in 1837, 1841, 1845,
and 1856,) and the four "Annual Reports" issued in 1857, 1858, 1859, and
1860, would occupy not less than eighteen hundred pages of the size of
those contained in this volume. The cost of such a work would greatly
limit its circulation and its usefulness, if indeed any publisher should
undertake its issue. There seemed no alternative except to abandon the
idea of an American edition altogether, or to present it to the public
in a condensed form.

Such a condensation seemed, on examination, to be entirely practicable.
Owing to the "Parts" of the "Narrative" having been published at four
separate periods, it often happens that the same matter is several
times repeated. A large portion of the space is occupied with the
acknowledgment of donations received. These entries, although
appropriate in a report made to the donors and to the British public,
have not the same interest for American readers. The discussion of some
points in church polity, and the account of the Author's journeys upon
the Continent, though interesting and instructive, are not necessary to
the continuity of the history. Although in some cases the portions which
have been omitted cover a considerable period of time, yet it is
believed that all which is essential has been retained. No pains have
been spared on the part of the Editor to preserve the value of the work
while reducing its compass, and to give, in a form universally
accessible, a clear exhibition of the wonderful results of the life of
George Müller, as well as of the principles by which his life has been
governed.

Believing that the book would be rendered more attractive to the reader,
and more convenient for reference, the Editor has divided it into
Chapters, and has prefixed to each a brief statement of some of the
leading subjects introduced in the Chapter. For these "contents," as
well as for the headings of the Chapters, and for the general title of
the volume, the Editor alone is responsible.

The "Narrative" of George Müller has been blessed in other lands to the
awakening of spiritual life. It was the means, as will be observed by
the reader, of greatly forwarding, if not of originating, the work of
grace now advancing in Ireland. "THE LIFE OF TRUST" is submitted to the
Christian public of America, in the hope that its still small voice may
be heard even amid the clangor of political strife and the revulsion of
commercial interests, and that it may be used by the Divine Spirit to
promote and strengthen in the hearts of American Christians, FAITH IN
THE LIVING GOD.

H. L. W.

WORCESTER, DEC. 12, 1860




AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


It was only after the consideration of many months, and after much
self-examination as to my motives, and after much earnest prayer, that I
came to the conclusion to write this work. I have not taken one single
step in the Lord's service concerning which I have prayed so much. My
great dislike to increasing the number of religious books would, in
itself, have been sufficient to have kept me forever from it, had I not
cherished the hope of being instrumental in this way to lead some of my
brethren to value the Holy Scriptures more, and to judge by the standard
of the Word of God the principles on which they act. But that which
weighed more with me than anything, was, that I have reason to believe,
from what I have seen among the children of God, that many of their
trials arise either from want of confidence in the Lord as it regards
temporal things, or from carrying on their business in an unscriptural
way. On account, therefore, of the remarkable way in which the Lord has
dealt with me as to temporal things, I feel that I am a debtor to the
church of Christ, and that I ought, for the benefit of my poorer
brethren especially, to make known the way in which I have been led. In
addition to this, I know that to many souls the Lord has blessed what I
have told them about the way in which he has led me, and therefore it
seemed a duty to use such means, whereby others also, with whom I could
not possibly converse, might be benefited. That which induced me finally
to determine to write this Narrative was, that if the Lord should permit
the book to sell, I might, by the profits arising from the sale, be
enabled in a greater degree to help the poor brethren and sisters among
whom I labor;--a matter which, just at that time, weighed much on my
mind. I therefore began to write. But after three days I was obliged to
lay the work aside on account of my other pressing engagements.
Subsequently, I was laid aside on account of an abscess; and being
unable, for many weeks, to walk about as usual, though able to work at
home, I had time for writing. When the manuscript was nearly completed I
gave it to a brother to look over, that I might have his judgment; and
the Lord so refreshed his spirit through it, that he offered to advance
the means for having it printed, with the understanding that if the book
should not sell he would never consider me his debtor. By this offer not
a small obstacle was removed, as I have no means of my own to defray the
expense of printing. These last two circumstances, connected with many
other points, confirmed me that I had not been mistaken, when I came to
the conclusion that it was the will of God that I should serve his
church in this way.

The fact of my being a foreigner, and therefore but very imperfectly
acquainted with the English language, I judged to be no sufficient
reason for keeping me from writing. The Christian reader, being
acquainted with this fact, will candidly excuse any inaccuracy of
expression.

For the poor among the brethren this Narrative is especially intended,
and to their prayers I commend it in particular.

GEORGE MÜLLER.




CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION                                                      XV


CHAPTER I.

Boyhood and Youth.

1805-1825.

   BIRTH--EARLY DISHONESTY--INSENSIBILITY--CONFIRMATION IN
   THE STATE CHURCH--DISSOLUTENESS OF LIFE--THE HARD WAY OF
   TRANSGRESSORS--THE GYMNASIUM AT NORDHAUSEN--THE
   UNIVERSITY AT HALLE--ROVINGS                                   31


CHAPTER II.

The Prodigal's Return.

1825-1826.

   A TREASURE FOUND--DAWNING OF THE NEW LIFE--THE PEACE OF
   GOD--"I AM COME TO SET A MAN AT VARIANCE AGAINST HIS
   FATHER"--"LET HIM THAT HEARETH SAY, COME"--THE FIRST
   SERMON--DELIGHT IN THE LORD--A COMMON ERROR--THE FOUNTAIN
   NEGLECTED                                                      38


CHAPTER III.

Self-Dedication.

1826-1829.

   DESIRE FOR MISSIONARY LABOR--PROVIDENTIAL RELEASE FROM
   MILITARY SERVICE--VISIT AT HOME--LED TO THE LAND OF HIS
   FUTURE LABORS--PROGRESS IN RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE--DESIRE
   FOR IMMEDIATE USEFULNESS                                       47


CHAPTER IV.

Leaning on Jesus.

1830-1832.

   A DOOR OPENED--TOKENS FOR GOOD--TRUST EXERCISED IN THE
   STUDY AND MINISTRY OF THE WORD--THE SWORD OF THE
   SPIRIT--TRUSTING IN GOD FOR DAILY BREAD--BLESSEDNESS OF
   WAITING UPON THE LORD--"OWE NO MAN"--"ACCORDING TO YOUR
   FAITH BE IT UNTO YOU"--THE GIFT OF FAITH AND THE GRACE
   OF FAITH                                                       58


CHAPTER V.

Ministry at Bristol Begun.

1832-1833.

   "HERE HAVE WE NO CONTINUING CITY"--CAUTION TO THE
   CHRISTIAN TRAVELLER--NEW TOKENS FOR GOOD--THE WAY MADE
   CLEAR--MEETINGS FOR INQUIRY--NO RESPECT OF PERSONS WITH
   GOD--FRANCKE, "BEING DEAD, YET SPEAKETH"--DAILY BREAD
   SUPPLIED--A PECULIAR PEOPLE                                    80


CHAPTER VI.

The Scriptural Knowledge Institution.

1834-1835.

   UNSCRIPTURAL CHARACTER OF THE EXISTING RELIGIOUS AND
   BENEVOLENT SOCIETIES--A NEW INSTITUTION PROPOSED--GOD'S
   WORD THE ONLY RULE, AND GOD'S PROMISE THE ONLY
   DEPENDENCE--"IN EVERYTHING LET YOUR REQUEST BE MADE KNOWN
   UNTO GOD"--EARNEST OF THE DIVINE BLESSING ON THE
   INSTITUTION--BEREAVEMENT--HELPER SEASONABLY SENT--REWARD
   OF SEEKING GOD'S FACE                                          94


CHAPTER VII.

Home for Destitute Orphans.

1835-1836.

   FRANKE'S WORKS FOLLOW HIM--A GREAT UNDERTAKING
   CONCEIVED--REASONS FOR ESTABLISHING AN ORPHAN
   HOUSE--PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE--TREASURE LAID UP IN HEAVEN IN
   PRAYER AND IN FAITH THE WORK IS BEGUN                         111


CHAPTER VIII.

The Field Widening.

1836-1837.

   AN UNEXPECTED OBSTACLE--IMPLICIT SUBMISSION--A SECOND
   ORPHAN HOUSE PROPOSED--AN ENCOURAGING TEXT--THE NEW
   ORPHAN HOUSE OPENED--COMPLETED ANSWER TO PRAYER--PROGRESS
   OF THE LORD'S WORK--THE OVERSIGHT OF THE FLOCK                125


CHAPTER IX.

Trial.

1838.

   THE MINISTRY OF SICKNESS--PEACE OF MIND--JESUS A PRESENT
   HELP--DEEP POVERTY--PLEADING WITH GOD--UNITED PRAYER          138


CHAPTER X.

Deliverance.

1838.

   "PERPLEXED BUT NOT IN DESPAIR"--FAITH JUSTIFIED--A LESSON
   OF OBEDIENCE--BOUNTIFUL SUPPLIES--SPIRITUAL
   INGATHERING--A DAY OF MERCIES--TIMELY AID--A SEASON OF
   PLENTY--OBEDIENCE REWARDED                                    151


CHAPTER XI.

Asking and Receiving.

1839.

   HELP FOR THE POOR SAINTS--THE UNFAILING BANK--MEANS
   EXHAUSTED--LIBERALITY OF A LABORING SISTER--"HE KNOWETH
   OUR FRAME"--REDEEMING THE TIME--GODLINESS PROFITABLE
   UNTO ALL THINGS                                               167


CHAPTER XII.

Plenty and Want.

1840.

   A PURE OFFERING REQUIRED--A JOURNEY PROPOSED--SEASONABLE
   PROVISION--LOOKING ONLY TO THE LORD--THE WRATH OF MAN
   PRAISING GOD--A PROMISE FULFILLED--BENEFIT OF TRIAL--NEW
   SPRINGS OPENED--BEFORE THEY CALL I WILL ANSWER--TRUST IN
   GOD COMMENDED--SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS                            181


CHAPTER XIII.

Faith Strengthened by Exercise.

1841.

   A WANT SUPPLIED--RESOURCES EXCEEDING THE DEMAND--EVIL OF
   SURETYSHIP--POWER OF CHRISTIAN LOVE--GOD'S WORD THE FOOD
   OF THE SOUL--PREPARATION FOR THE HOUR OF
   TRIAL--POVERTY--DEPENDING ONLY ON THE LIVING GOD              200


CHAPTER XIV.

Walking in Darkness.

1841-1842.

   "GOD'S WAY LEADS INTO TRIAL"--GROUNDS OF
   THANKFULNESS--PROTRACTED DARKNESS--CAST DOWN, BUT NOT
   DESTROYED--TRUST IN GOD COMMENDED--THE MEANS OF ITS
   ATTAINMENT--REVIEW OF THE WORK                                214


CHAPTER XV.

Prosperity.

1842-1843.

   ABUNDANT SUPPLIES--RESTING ON THE WRITTEN WORD--"SEEKING
   AND FINDING"--ERRONEOUS IMPRESSIONS REMOVED--PERSEVERING
   AND PREVAILING PRAYER ANSWERED--"LENGTHENING THE CORDS
   AND STRENGTHENING THE STAKES"--A FOURTH ORPHAN HOUSE          241


CHAPTER XVI.

Stewardship.

1844.

   EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY TREASURES--SEEKING THE KINGDOM OF
   GOD--FELLOWSHIP WITH THE FATHER--THE CHRISTIAN
   MERCHANT--EXAMPLES--MISTAKES                                  259


CHAPTER XVII.

Reaping Bountifully.

1845-1846.

   AN UNEXPECTED REQUEST--DELIBERATION--A GREAT
   UNDERTAKING--RELIANCE ON THE RESOURCES OF THE LIVING
   GOD--AN ANSWER EXPECTED AND RECEIVED--PRAYER FOR FAITH
   AND PATIENCE--FURTHER PROOFS OF DIVINE FAVOR--THE
   BLESSEDNESS OF DEVISING LIBERAL THINGS                        294


CHAPTER XVIII.

Faith Confirmed by Prosperity.

1846-1848.

   THE SPIRIT OF SUPPLICATION BESTOWED AND PRAYER
   ANSWERED--THE TIME OF MAN'S NEED AND OF GOD'S
   BOUNTY--FAITH NOT SHAKEN--DEALING ONLY WITH GOD--THE
   NEEDED AMOUNT FURNISHED--PERPETUAL "NEED"--NOT WEARY IN
   GOD'S WORK--JOY IN ANSWERED PRAYER--FOUR REQUESTS
   GRANTED--"CONTINUING INSTANT IN PRAYER"--THE BUILDING
   COMMENCED--PERSONAL HISTORY--A MARKED DELIVERANCE             319


CHAPTER XIX.

Continued Mercies.

1848-1850.

   HUMBLE BEGINNINGS--DEVISING LIBERAL THINGS--THE ORPHANS
   PROVIDED FOR--A MEMORABLE DAY--MONEY "AT INTEREST"--MEANS
   FROM AN UNEXPECTED SOURCE--THE PROGRESS OF THE NEW ORPHAN
   HOUSE--MEANS PROVIDED FOR ITS COMPLETION--INEXPRESSIBLE
   DELIGHT IN GOD--REVIEW OF THE TWO YEARS PAST                  347


CHAPTER XX.

A New Victory of Faith.

1850-1851.

   PAST MERCIES AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO NEW UNDERTAKINGS--A
   HOUSE FOR SEVEN HUNDRED ORPHANS PROPOSED--WALKING BY
   FAITH--COUNSEL SOUGHT FROM GOD--THE PURPOSE
   FORMED--DELIGHT IN THE MAGNITUDE AND DIFFICULTY
   OF THE DESIGN                                                 364


CHAPTER XXI.

Unvarying Prosperity.

1850-1852.

   DESIRES FOR MORE ENLARGED USEFULNESS GRATIFIED--A LARGE
   DONATION ANTICIPATED AND RECEIVED--REVIEW OF
   1851--PERSONAL EXPERIENCE--BUILDING FUND FOR THE SECOND
   NEW ORPHAN HOUSE--DOUBT RESISTED--WAITING ON GOD NOT
   IN VAIN--REVIEW OF 1852                                       389


CHAPTER XXII.

Reaping in Joy.

1852-1854.

   EXPECTING GREAT THINGS FROM GOD--MUNIFICENT
   DONATION--INCREASING USEFULNESS OF THE SCRIPTURAL
   KNOWLEDGE INSTITUTION--ACCESS TO GOD THROUGH FAITH IN
   CHRIST--A VOICE FROM MOUNT LEBANON--BENEFIT OF WAITING
   GOD'S TIME--CAREFUL STEWARDSHIP--FAITH, THE ONLY
   RELIANCE--"THIS POOR WIDOW HATH CAST IN MORE THAN THEY
   ALL"--GREATER ACHIEVEMENTS OF FAITH ANTICIPATED--COUNSEL
   TO TRACT DISTRIBUTORS--A NEW AND SEVERE TRIAL OF FAITH        402


CHAPTER XXIII.

Three Years of Prosperity.

1854-1857.

   THE SITE SELECTED--SIX THOUSAND ORPHANS IN PRISON--HOW TO
   ASK FOR DAILY BREAD--REVIEW OF TWENTY-FOUR YEARS--"TAKE
   NO THOUGHT FOR THE MORROW"--INSURANCE AGAINST BAD DEBTS       426


CHAPTER XXIV.

Conclusion.

1857-1860.

   THE HOUSE FOR FOUR HUNDRED OPENED--PRAYER MORE THAN
   ANSWERED--THE RESORT IN TROUBLE--AN OUTPOURING OF THE
   SPIRIT ON THE ORPHANS--LAND FOR A NEW BUILDING
   PURCHASED--"BUT ONE LIFE TO SPEND FOR GOD"--"SCATTERING,
   YET INCREASING"--A MEMORABLE YEAR--THE GERM OF THE IRISH
   REVIVAL--LETTER FROM AN ORPHAN--THE FRUIT OF SIX MONTHS'
   PRAYER--THE RESULTS OF THE WORK--REVIVAL AMONG
   THE ORPHANS                                                   446


APPENDIX                                                         473




INTRODUCTION.


What is meant by the prayer of faith? is a question which is beginning
to arrest, in an unusual degree, the attention of Christians. What is
the significance of the passages both in the New Testament and the Old
which refer to it? What is the limit within which they may be safely
received as a ground of practical reliance? Were these promises limited
to prophetical or apostolical times; or have they been left as a legacy
to all believers until the end shall come?

Somehow or other, these questions are seldom discussed either from the
pulpit or the press. I do not remember to have heard any of them
distinctly treated of in a sermon. I do not know of any work in which
this subject is either theoretically explained or practically enforced.
It really seems as if this portion of Revelation was, by common consent,
ignored in all our public teachings. Do not men believe that God means
what he appears plainly to have asserted? or, if we believe that he
means it, do we fear the charge of fanaticism if we openly avow that we
take him at his word?

The public silence on this subject does not, however, prevent a very
frequent private inquiry in respect to it. The thoughtful Christian,
when in his daily reading of the Scriptures he meets with any of those
wonderful promises made to believing prayer, often pauses to ask
himself, What can these words mean? Can it be that God has made such
promises as these to me, and to such men as I am? Have I really
permission to commit all my little affairs to a God of infinite wisdom,
believing that he will take charge of them and direct them according to
the promptings of boundless love and absolute omniscience? Is prayer
really a power with God, or is it merely an expedient by which our own
piety may be cultivated? Is it not merely a power (that is, a stated
antecedent accompanied by the idea of causation), but is it a
transcendent power, accomplishing what no other power can, over-ruling
all other agencies, and rendering them subservient to its own wonderful
efficiency? I think there are few devout readers of the Bible to whom
these questions are not frequently suggested. We ask them, but we do not
often wait for an answer. These promises seem to us to be addressed
either to a past or to a coming age, but not to us, at the present day.
Yet with such views as these the devout soul is not at all satisfied. If
an invaluable treasure is here reserved for the believer, he asks, why
should I not receive my portion of it? He cannot doubt that God has in a
remarkable manner, at various times, answered his prayers; why should he
not always answer them? and why should not the believer always draw near
to God in full confidence that he will do as he has said? He may
remember that the prayer which has been manifestly answered was the
offspring of deep humility, of conscious unworthiness, of utter
self-negation, and of simple and earnest reliance on the promises of God
through the mediation of Christ. Why should not his prayers be always of
the same character? With the apostles of old he pours out his soul in
the petition, "Lord, increase our faith."

And yet it can scarcely be denied that the will of God has been
distinctly revealed on this subject. The promises made to believing
prayer are explicit, numerous, and diversified. If we take them in their
simple and literal meaning, or if in fact we give to them any reasonable
interpretation whatever, they seem to be easily understood. Our
difficulty seems to be this: the promise is so "exceeding great" that we
cannot conceive God really to mean what he clearly appears to have
revealed. The blessing seems too vast for our comprehension; we "stagger
at the promises, through unbelief," and thus fail to secure the treasure
which was purchased for us by Christ Jesus.

It may be appropriate for us to review some of the passages which refer
most directly to this subject:--

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you; for _every one_ that asketh receiveth, and he
that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh _it shall_ be opened."
"If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children,
_how much more_ shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to
them that _ask_ him."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Matthew vii. 7-11.]

In the Gospel of Luke the same words are repeated, with a single
variation at the close. "If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
_Holy Spirit to them that ask him_."[2]

  [Footnote 2: Luke xi. 13.]

"I say unto you that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching
anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them."[3]

  [Footnote 3: Matthew xviii. 19, 20.]

"Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have
faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do that which is done to the
fig-tree, but also ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and
be thou cast into the sea, and it shall be done. And _all things
whatsoever_ ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive."[4]

  [Footnote 4: Matthew xxi. 21, 22.]

The same promise, slightly varied in form, is found in the Gospel of
Mark. "_Have faith in God._ For verily I say unto you that whosoever
shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those
things which he hath said shall come to pass, he shall have whatever he
saith. Therefore I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them."[5]

  [Footnote 5: Mark xi. 22-24.]

Now I do not pretend that we are obliged to receive these words
literally. Unless, however, we believe the Saviour to have spoken
repeatedly on the same subject, at random, and with no definite meaning,
we must understand him to have asserted that things impossible by the
ordinary laws of material causation are possible by faith in God. I do
not perceive, if we allow these words to have any meaning whatever, that
we can ascribe to them any other significance.

"Verily I say unto you, He that believeth in me, the works that I do
shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go
unto my Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will do,
that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in
my name I will do it."[6]

  [Footnote 6: John xiv. 12-14.]

"Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and
ye shall receive, that your joy may be full."[7]

  [Footnote 7: John xvi. 23, 24.]

"The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man _availeth much_;"[8]
that is, it is a real power, a positive energy. The apostle illustrates
what he means by availing prayer by the example of Elias, a man subject
to like passions as we are: "He prayed earnestly that it might not rain,
and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six
months; and he prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit."[9]

  [Footnote 8: James v. 16.]

  [Footnote 9: James v. 17, 18.]

The conditions on which prayer will be heard are in various places
specified, but particularly in John xv. 7: "If ye abide in me and my
words abide in you, ye shall _ask what ye will_, and it shall be done
unto you." That is, if I understand the passage, prevalence in prayer is
conditioned by the conformity of our souls to the will of God; "if ye
abide in me and my words abide in you." On this condition, and on this
only, may we ask what we will, with the assurance that it will be done
unto us. Faith, in its most simple meaning, is that temper of the mind
in the creature which responds to every revealed perfection of the
Creator. Just according to the degree in which this correspondence
exists, is the promise made that we shall have whatsoever we ask.

It is evident, from the eleventh of Hebrews, that the views of the
Apostle Paul concerning faith were entirely in harmony with the passages
recited above. He reviews the lives of the most eminent saints, for the
express purpose of showing that the impressive events in their history,
whether physical or moral, were controlled entirely by faith. He sums up
the whole in this remarkable language:--

"And what shall I say more? For the time would fail me to tell of those
who _through faith_ subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire,
escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens; women
received their dead raised to life again; and others were tortured, not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection." We
are, I think, taught by this passage that the apostle believed faith to
be a power capable of transcending and modifying every other agency, by
which changes became possible which to every other known power were
impossible. We see that in this catalogue of the victories of faith he
includes the subjection of almost every form of what we call natural
laws. The whole passage seems an illustration of the meaning of our
Lord, when he says, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
shall say to this sycamine tree, Be thou removed and planted in the
midst of the sea, and it shall obey you."

It seems then apparent that the doctrine of the peculiar and wonderful
power of the prayer of faith is as clearly revealed in the Scriptures as
any other doctrine. It would seem evident, at any rate, from the
passages just quoted, that the Apostle Paul understood the teachings of
our Saviour to mean what they say. From the general tenor of the
Scriptures I think we may learn two important truths: First, that there
is a certain state of mind in a devout soul to which God has promised
all that it asks, subject, however, as to the manner of the answer, to
the dictates of his infinite wisdom and goodness; and, second, that in
granting such petitions he does not always limit his action within the
ordinary or acknowledged laws of matter or of mind. I do not perceive
how we can interpret the passages above cited, as well as many others,
without giving them a meaning at least as extensive as this.

Why is it, then, that this whole range of revealed truth has so
generally been looked upon as an unknown and unexplored region? Why
should we limit either the goodness or the power of God by our own
knowledge of what we call the laws of nature? Why should we not admit
that "there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in
our philosophy"? In a universe governed by moral law, why should not
moral laws take precedence of all others? Why should we deny that there
is a power in prayer to which we have not commonly attained? We are
straitened in ourselves, and suppose that we are straitened in God. We
interpret the gracious promises of our most loving Father in heaven by
the rule of our own imperfect and unbelieving piety. We ask for light
from without, while the light can only come from a more elevated piety
within. We ask for examples of the effects of faith at the present day,
corresponding to those spoken of in the sacred Scriptures. Thoughtful
men acknowledge that there must be a meaning in these promises, which
they have not yet understood, and they see plainly that the kingdom of
God can never come with power until this prevalence in prayer shall have
become a matter of universal attainment; and yet they dare hardly
believe that God is as good as he has revealed himself to be.

There have, nevertheless, from time to time, occurred, what plainly
appear to be, remarkable instances of answers to prayer. Many of them
have faded from recollection, with the generation in which they
occurred; those which are remembered, however, seem to teach us that God
is a living God now as truly as in times past. The history of
persecutions is always filled with remarkable answers to prayer. The
rescue of Peter from the power of the Sanhedrim in one case, and from
the power of Herod in another, has been a thousand times repeated in the
history of the church of Christ. The answer to prayer for divine
direction as to the time and manner of performing some Christian
service, to which an individual has felt himself specially called, has
frequently been very remarkable. The biographies of the early and of
many of the later Friends are replete with such instances. Any one who
will read the edifying memoirs of George Fox, John Woolman, William
Allen, and Stephen Grellet, will find what I have alluded to abundantly
exemplified. The well-authenticated accounts of the late revivals in
this country and in Ireland teach us that most remarkable instances of
answers to prayer were of almost daily occurrence. In the last century a
single instance deserves particular remembrance; it was the founding of
Franke's Orphan House at Halle. It seemed to him to be a Christian duty
to attempt something for the relief of orphans, and he commenced the
undertaking. From time to time, as the number of applicants increased,
the means for their support was provided, in answer, as he firmly
believed, to fervent and unceasing prayer. Thus an extensive
establishment was reared, which has continued to the present day,
providing education and support for thousands of the poor and destitute,
and it has been for a century and a half one of the most honored of the
charitable institutions of the continent of Europe.

The most remarkable instance of the efficacy of prayer with which I am
acquainted, is that recorded in the following pages. It seems, in fact,
to be a practical illustration of the meaning of those passages of
Scripture which I have already recited. A young German Christian,
friendless and unknown, is conscious of what he believes to be a call
from the Lord to attempt something for the benefit of the poor vagabond
children of Bristol. He is at this time preaching the gospel to a small
company of believers, from whom, at his own suggestion, he receives no
salary, being supported day by day by the voluntary offerings of his
brethren. Without the promise of aid from any being but God, he
commences his work. In answer to prayer, funds are received as they are
needed, and the attempt succeeds beyond his expectation. After a few
years he is led to believe that God has called him to establish a house
for the maintenance and education of orphans. He was impelled to this
effort, not only from motives of benevolence, but from a desire to
convince men that God was a LIVING GOD, as ready now as ever to answer
prayer; and that, in the discharge of any duty to which he calls us, we
may implicitly rely upon his all-sufficient aid in every emergency.

Mr. Müller was led to undertake this work in such a manner that aid
could not be expected from any being but God. He did not of course
expect God to create gold and silver and put them into his hands. He
knew, however, that God could incline the hearts of men to aid him, and
he believed, if the thing that he attempted was of Him, that he would so
incline them, in answer to prayer, as his necessities should require.
Most men in making such an attempt would have spread the case before the
public, employed agents to solicit in its behalf, and undertaken
nothing until funds adequate to the success of the enterprise had been
already secured. But Mr. Müller, true to his principles, would do no
such thing. From the first day to the present moment he has neither
directly nor indirectly solicited either of the public or of an
individual a single penny. As necessities arose he simply laid his case
before God and asked of him all that he needed, and the supply has
always been seasonable and unfailing.

The conductors of benevolent enterprises generally consider it important
to publish the names of donors, appealing thus to what is considered an
innocent desire in man to let our good deeds be known, and thus also to
stimulate others to do likewise. Ignoring every motive of this kind, Mr.
Müller made it his rule to publish the name of no contributor. When the
name was known to him, which, however, was not often the case, he made a
private acknowledgment; while in his printed account he only made known
the sum received, and the date of its reception. In this manner,
forsaking every other reliance but God, and in childlike simplicity
looking to him alone for the supply of every want, all that he needed
was furnished as punctually as if, in possession of millions, he had
drawn from time to time on his banker.

Thus has he continued from, I think, the year 1834. By degrees the
establishment increased, and it was necessary to leave the hired houses
in which the children had thus far been accommodated. Land was
purchased, and a building was erected in the vicinity of Bristol. This
was soon filled to overflowing, and another building was demanded. This
was erected, and it also was very soon filled. These buildings were
sufficient to accommodate seven hundred orphans. At the present moment,
a third building, larger than either, is in the process of erection, and
is to be finished in the course of the ensuing summer. When this shall
be completed, accommodations will have been provided for eleven hundred
and fifty orphans. These expensive buildings have been erected; the
land has been purchased on which they stand; this multitude of children
has been clothed and fed and educated; support and remuneration have
been provided for all the necessary teachers and assistants, and all
this has been done by a man who is not worth a dollar. He has never
asked any one but God for whatever they needed, and from the beginning
they have never wanted a meal, nor have they ever allowed themselves to
be in debt. There seems in this to be something as remarkable as if Mr.
Müller had commanded a sycamine tree to be removed and planted in the
sea, and it had obeyed him.

But this is not all. Mr. Müller saw that there was a great demand for
copies of the Holy Scriptures, both in Great Britain and on the
Continent, and he commenced the work of Bible distribution. This so
rapidly extended itself that he was soon obliged to open in Bristol a
large Bible House. He believed that great good might be done by the
circulation of religious tracts, and he has carried on this work
extensively. He was moved to make an attempt to aid and even to support
missionaries among the heathen, as well as other good men, of various
denominations, who, with very inadequate means of living, were preaching
the gospel to the poor and destitute at home. He began to aid them as
their necessities came to his knowledge, and now one hundred such men
are depending on him, wholly or in part, for support.

Here, then, we certainly behold a remarkable phenomenon. A single man,
wholly destitute of funds, is supporting and educating seven hundred
orphans, providing everything needful for their education, is in himself
an extensive Bible and Tract and Missionary Society, the work is daily
increasing in magnitude, and the means for carrying it on are abundantly
supplied, while he is connected with no particular denomination, is
aided by no voluntary association, and he has asked the assistance of
not a single individual. He has asked no one but God, and all his wants
have been regularly supplied. In these labors of love he has, up to the
present time, expended nearly a million of dollars. It is thus that he
has endeavored to show to an unbelieving world that God is a living God,
and that he means what he has said in every one of his promises.[10]

  [Footnote 10: The following brief statistics will show the
  magnitude of the work already accomplished:--

  The number of pupils hitherto instructed in all the day,
  evening, and Sunday schools, is 13,124. The whole number
  of _orphans_ educated within the establishment is 1,153.
  Of the 700 now in the Institution, 260 are hopefully
  pious. Missionaries aided at the present time, 100. Since
  1834 there have been circulated,--Bibles, 24,768;
  Testaments, 15,100; Psalms, 719; other portions of
  Scripture, 1,876; or, total, 42,463 Bibles or portions of
  Scripture. Tracts and books (not pages, but separate
  publications), 11,493,174.

  Two large buildings have been erected, a third is in the
  process of erection; the land on which they stand has been
  purchased. The expense of the orphan work alone has
  amounted to £133,528 sterling, and the expenses are daily
  increasing.

  The contributions by which these expenditures have been
  met have been sent from every quarter of the globe. The
  largest amounts have been, as might be expected, from
  England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales; but to these may be
  added the Cape of Good Hope, Mt. Lebanon, Demerara,
  Newport, R. I., New York, Philadelphia, California,
  France, Holland, Sardinia, Australia, etc., etc.]

I have referred to Mr. Müller as if he were the sole agent in this work.
This, however, is by no means true. His co-workers in the Institution
are all of the same spirit as himself. Mr. Craik, a gentleman from
Scotland, has been with him from the beginning, has shared in all the
labors and responsibilities of these vast undertakings, and has been
specially blessed as a preacher of the gospel. The remuneration of all
the assistants is contingent on the means received in answer to prayer.
When sacrifices are to be made, they are all prompt to make them, and
they do not expect an answer to prayer until they have contributed, from
their own scanty wages, whatever can be spared after providing for their
actual necessities.

The last Report of Mr. Müller's labors has just been received. From this
we learn another interesting fact. It seems that the late revival in
Ireland is indirectly connected with these labors in Bristol. A pious
young Irishman read "The Dealings of the Lord with George Müller," and
received from it new views of the power of believing prayer. He felt the
need of prayer for the perishing around him, and determined by prayer
and conversation to labor for their salvation. First, however, he asked
that God would give him an associate. This prayer was granted. These two
then united in earnest prayer for some additions to their number. This
prayer was granted. In this manner a small company was united in asking
for an outpouring of the Holy Spirit on their neighborhood. They devoted
themselves to prayer and to labor among the people by whom they were
surrounded. Their prayers were answered. The Spirit was poured out;
twenty-five souls were converted. Multitudes united with them in
supplication. They went from place to place, praying and laboring for
the conversion of men; and thus the work extended, until the whole
district of Ulster was visited with that remarkable outpouring of the
Holy Spirit.

All these we suppose to be indisputable facts. If in any respect there
has been a misstatement, or even an exaggeration, the means are abundant
for detecting it. The whole work has been carried on in the presence and
under the inspection of the whole city of Bristol. There stand those
large and expensive buildings. There are seen the seven hundred orphans
who are in every respect admirably cared for. Everything has been paid
for, for Mr. Müller is never in debt. His poverty is well known, and he
will not accept of any money as a provision for his future necessities.
His accounts have been annually audited by a competent committee. There
is not the man living who can contradict his assertion, "I never asked
aid from a single individual." Hundreds weekly visit the Institution,
and no one has ever found in it anything at variance with Mr. Müller's
published statements. Last of all, the Rev. Dr. Sawtelle, a gentleman
known to thousands in this country, has added his independent testimony
to the truth of all that is here related. More conclusive evidence to
the truth of facts cannot be desired.

To account for a fact is to refer it to some general law whose existence
is already established. When it is therefore asked, How shall these
facts be accounted for? we inquire, to what known law can they be
referred? They cannot certainly be referred to any known law of human
action. How would we decide if a similar case should occur in physics?
Suppose a series of experiments should be made daily for twenty-five
years in chemistry or mechanics, with the same invariable result, and
this result could be referred to no previously established law,--to what
conclusion should we arrive? There could be but one conclusion, in which
all men of science would unite. They would all declare that a new law
had been discovered, and would modify their systems accordingly. It
seems to me that on all sound philosophical principles we are bound to
come to the same conclusion in the present case. We can refer these
facts to no other law than to that announced by the Saviour in his
promise to answer the prayer of faith. There is no reason to suppose
that in the case of Mr. Müller and his associates there is anything
exceptional or peculiar. What God has done for them we cannot doubt
that, under the same conditions, he will do for every other believing
disciple of Christ.

What, then, are the conditions of this remarkable experiment, if such we
may call it? They are something like the following. A poor and unknown
man is convinced that it is his duty, as a servant of Christ, to labor
in several ways for the relief of the temporal and spiritual wants of
the ignorant and destitute. He consecrates himself to the work by
dedicating to it his time and labor, and whatever pecuniary means should
come into his possession. He resolved that he would neither appeal to
any of the ordinary motives which dispose men to humanity, nor even
solicit aid from any human being, but simply make his wants known to
God, believing that, if he was doing the work of God, the divine
promise was pledged in his behalf. Not only did he trust in God that
all the pecuniary aid which he needed would be furnished, but that, in
answer to prayer, all needed wisdom would be given him in the conduct of
his complicated and arduous undertakings. The result has met his most
sanguine expectations. The institution has increased to a most
magnificent charity, aside from its missionary, Bible, and tract
operations; all its wants have been from time to time supplied; and it
is at the present moment carried on upon precisely the same principles
on which it commenced. We cannot resist the conclusion that if any one
will undertake any other Christian work in a similar spirit, and on the
same principles, his labor will be attended with a similar result.

While we believe this, however, we do not pretend to affirm that just
such immediate results will always be seen. This would be to limit the
omniscience of God by the short-sighted ignorance of man. It may best
suit the purposes of infinite goodness to answer the prayer of faith by
crosses and disappointments; but these in the end shall be found in the
most signal manner to promote the object to be accomplished. While the
disciples were praying and laboring for the extension of the kingdom of
Christ in Jerusalem, it seemed a strange answer to prayer that they
should be driven out of the city; but the meaning of it was evident when
churches arose in Phenice and Cyprus and Antioch, and it became manifest
that the gospel was designed not for Jews alone; but for the whole
family of man. Paul devoted himself with unquenchable zeal to the
salvation of men, and, with a fervid eloquence which has given him a
place among the noblest orators of antiquity, delighted to spend his
life in persuading men to be reconciled to God. He was a man whose
confidence in God was as unshaken as any whose history has been recorded
by the pen of inspiration. It doubtless was to the disciples of that
age, as well as to himself, a most unaccountable dispensation that he
should have been impeded in his great work by the necessity of composing
dissensions and rectifying errors which were constantly arising in the
churches which he had planted, and, most of all, that so many years of
his life should have been spent in prison. Yet it is to these, at the
time untoward circumstances, that we owe the writing of those epistles
which occupy so large a portion of the volume of inspiration, and
without which the message of God to man would not have been completed.
In no other way could his prayer to be useful to the cause of Christ
have been so fully answered.

With this understanding of the promise granted to the prayer of faith, I
do not see why we should not take the case of Mr. Müller as an example
for our imitation. Whoever attains to this same simple desire in all
things to do the will of God, and to the same childlike trust in his
promises, may, I think, hope for a similar blessing. God is no respecter
of persons. "If _any_ man _do his will_, him he heareth." And all the
teaching of the Scriptures confirms us in this belief. The passages
which we have quoted at the commencement of this paper, with hundreds of
others, all lead to the same conclusion. In the Scriptures every form of
illustration is used to impress upon us the conviction that God is
indeed our Father, and that he delights to grant our requests for
anything that is for our benefit, and specially that he pledges himself
to direct by his counsel, and aid by his providence, every one who
honestly labors to promote the cause of true benevolence and real
religion.

If this be so, how important is this subject in its bearing on
individual effort. No Christian, though the poorest and humblest, ever
need despair of doing a noble work for God. He need never wait until he
can obtain the co-operation of the multitude or the wealthy. Let him
undertake what he believes to be his duty, on ever so small a scale, and
look directly to God for aid and direction. If it be a seed which God
has planted, it will take root, grow, and bear fruit, "_having seed
within itself_." "It is better to trust in God than to put confidence in
man; it is better to trust in God than to put confidence in princes." A
multitude of cases can be adduced to prove that this course is in
harmony with the designs of God. It is abundantly shown in the case of
Mr. Müller. Take the case of Robert Raikes. Suppose that he had
established no school until a powerful association, formed from
ecclesiastical dignitaries, millionaires, and the multitude, had united
in his support, his effort could hardly have escaped ridiculous failure.
On the contrary, he simply established a school by himself. It was a
seed which God had planted, and its fruit now shakes like Lebanon.

On the contrast which is seen between the plan of Mr. Müller and the
plans by which our missionary and other benevolent operations are
conducted, it is unnecessary to enlarge. If Mr. Müller is right, I think
it is evident that we are all wrong. We cannot go into this subject in
detail. We may, however, be permitted to remark, that the means which
are frequently employed to secure the approbation and pecuniary aid of
worldly men, in carrying forward the cause of Christ, are intensely
humiliating. It would seem as though God was the last being to be relied
on in carrying forward the work which he has given us to do.

But it is time to bring these remarks to a close. We commend this most
unpretending of narratives to the thoughtful consideration of Christians
of all denominations. We have greatly overrated the teaching of these
facts, if they do not furnish strong incentives to A LIFE OF HOLY
EXERTION, AND IMPART AN UNWONTED AND POWERFUL MOTIVE TO EARNEST AND
BELIEVING PRAYER.

PROVIDENCE, December 17, 1860.




THE LIFE OF TRUST.




CHAPTER I.

BOYHOOD AND YOUTH.

1805-1825.

  BIRTH--EARLY DISHONESTY--INSENSIBILITY--CONFIRMATION IN THE
  STATE CHURCH--DISSOLUTENESS OF LIFE--THE HARD WAY OF
  TRANSGRESSORS--THE GYMNASIUM AT NORDHAUSEN--THE UNIVERSITY
  AT HALLE--ROVINGS.


I was born at Kroppenstaedt, near Halberstadt, in the kingdom of
Prussia, September 27, 1805. In January, 1810, my parents removed to
Heimersleben, about four miles from Kroppenstaedt, where my father was
appointed collector in the excise.

My father, who educated his children on worldly principles,[11] gave us
much money, considering our age. The result was, that it led me and my
brother into many sins. Before I was ten years old, I repeatedly took of
the government money which was intrusted to my father, and which he had
to make up; till one day, as he had repeatedly missed money, he
detected my theft, by depositing a counted sum in the room where I was,
and leaving me to myself for a while. Being thus left alone, I took some
of the money, and hid it under my foot in my shoe. When my father, after
his return, had counted and missed the money, I was searched and my
theft detected.

  [Footnote 11: The opinion is often entertained that persons who
  become eminent for power in prayer and nearness of communion with
  God, owe their attainments to natural excellence of character, or
  to peculiarly favoring circumstances of early education. The
  narrative of the youth of Müller exhibits the fallaciousness of
  this view, and shows that the attainments which he made are within
  the reach of any one who will "ask of God, that giveth to _all men
  liberally_ and upbraideth not."--ED.]

When I was between ten and eleven years of age I was sent to
Halberstadt, there to be prepared for the university; for my father's
desire was that I should become a clergyman; not, indeed, that thus I
might serve God, but that I might have a comfortable living. My time was
now spent in studying, reading novels, and indulging, though so young,
in sinful practices. Thus it continued till I was fourteen years old,
when my mother was suddenly removed. The night she was dying, I, not
knowing of her illness, was playing at cards till two in the morning,
and on the next day, being the Lord's day, I went with some of my
companions in sin to a tavern, and then we went about the streets half
intoxicated.

This bereavement made no lasting impression on my mind. I grew worse and
worse. Three or four days before I was confirmed, and thus admitted to
partake of the Lord's Supper, I was guilty of gross immorality; and the
very day before my confirmation, when I was in the vestry with the
clergyman to confess my sins, after a formal manner, I defrauded him;
for I handed over to him only the twelfth part of the fee which my
father had given me for him. In this state of heart, without prayer,
without true repentance, without faith, without knowledge of the plan of
salvation, I was confirmed, and took the Lord's Supper, on the Sunday
after Easter, 1820. Yet I was not without some feeling about the
solemnity of the thing, and stayed at home in the afternoon and evening,
whilst the other boys and girls, who had been confirmed with me, walked
about in the fields.

My time till midsummer, 1821, was spent partly in study, but in a great
degree in playing the piano-forte and guitar, reading novels,
frequenting taverns, forming resolutions to become different, yet
breaking them almost as fast as they were made. My money was often spent
on my sinful pleasures, through which I was now and then brought into
trouble, so that once, to satisfy my hunger, I stole a piece of coarse
bread, the allowance of a soldier who was quartered in the house where I
lodged.

At midsummer, 1821, my father obtained an appointment at Schoenebeck,
near Magdeburg, and I embraced the opportunity of entreating him to
remove me to the cathedral classical school of Magdeburg; for I thought
that if I could but leave my companions in sin, and get out of certain
snares, and be placed under other tutors, I should then live a different
life. My father consented, and I was allowed to leave Halberstadt, and
to stay at Heimersleben till Michaelmas. Being thus quite my own master,
I grew still more idle, and lived as much as before in all sorts of sin.
When Michaelmas came, I persuaded my father to leave me at Heimersleben
till Easter, and to let me read the classics with a clergyman living in
the same place. I was now living on the premises belonging to my father,
under little real control, and intrusted with a considerable sum of
money, which I had to collect for my father, from persons who owed it to
him. My habits soon led me to spend a considerable part of this money,
giving receipts for different sums, yet leaving my father to suppose I
had not received them.

In November, I went on a pleasure excursion to Magdeburg, where I spent
six days in much sin, and though my absence from home had been found out
by my father before I returned from thence, yet I took all the money I
could obtain, and went to Brunswick, after I had, through a number of
lies, obtained permission from my tutor. I spent a week at Brunswick,
in an expensive hotel. At the end of the week my money was expended. I
then went, without money, to another hotel, in a village near Brunswick,
where I spent another week in an expensive way of living. At last, the
owner of the hotel, suspecting that I had no money, asked for payment,
and I was obliged to leave my best clothes as security. I then walked
about six miles, to Wolfenbuttel, went to an inn, and began again to
live as if I had plenty of money. On the second or third morning I went
quietly out of the yard, and then ran off; but being suspected and
observed, and therefore seen to go off, I was immediately called after,
and so had to return. I was arrested, and being suspected to be a thief,
was examined for about three hours, and then sent to jail. I now found
myself, at the age of sixteen, an inmate of the same dwelling with
thieves and murderers. I was locked up in this place day and night,
without permission to leave my cell.

I was in prison from Dec. 18, 1821, till January 12, 1822, when the
keeper told me to go with him to the police office. Here I found that
the commissioner before whom I had been tried, had acquainted my father
with my conduct; and thus I was kept in prison till my father sent the
money which was needed for my travelling expenses, to pay my debt in the
inn, and for my maintenance in the prison. So ungrateful was I now for
certain little kindnesses shown to me by a fellow-prisoner, that,
although I had promised to call on his sister, to deliver a message from
him, I omitted to do so; and so little had I been benefited by this, my
chastisement, that, though I was going home to meet an angry father,
only two hours after I had left the town where I had been imprisoned, I
chose an avowedly wicked person as my travelling companion for a great
part of my journey.

My father, who arrived two days after I had reached Heimersleben, after
having severely beaten me, took me home to Schoenebeck, intending, at
Easter, to send me to a classical school at Halle, that I might be under
strict discipline and the continual inspection of a tutor. Easter came,
and I easily persuaded him to let me stay at home till Michaelmas. But
after that period he would not consent to my remaining any longer with
him, and I left home, pretending to go to Halle to be examined. But
having a hearty dislike to the strict discipline of which I had heard, I
went to Nordhausen, and had myself examined to be received into that
school. I then went home, but never told my father a word of all this
deception till the day before my departure, which obliged me to invent a
whole chain of lies. He was then very angry; but at last, through my
entreaties and persuasion, he gave way and allowed me to go. This was in
October, 1822.

I continued at Nordhausen two years and six months. During this time I
studied with considerable diligence the Latin classics, French, history,
my own language, etc.; but did little in Hebrew, Greek, and the
mathematics. I lived in the house of the director, and got, through my
conduct, highly into his favor, so much so that I was held up by him in
the first class as an example to the rest. I used now to rise regularly
at four, winter and summer, and generally studied all the day, with
little exception, till ten at night.

But whilst I was thus outwardly gaining the esteem of my
fellow-creatures, I did not care in the least about God, but lived
secretly in much sin, in consequence of which I was taken ill, and for
thirteen weeks confined to my room. During my illness I had no real
sorrow of heart, yet, being under certain natural impressions of
religion, I read through Klopstock's works without weariness. I cared
nothing about the word of God. I had about three hundred books of my
own, but no Bible. Now and then I felt that I ought to become a
different person, and I tried to amend my conduct, particularly when I
went to the Lord's Supper, as I used to do twice every year, with the
other young men. The day previous to attending that ordinance, I used to
refrain from certain things; and on the day itself I was serious, and
also swore once or twice to God, with the emblem of the broken body in
my mouth, to become better, thinking that for the oath's sake I should
be induced to reform. But after one or two days were over, all was
forgotten, and I was as bad as before.

At Easter, 1825, I became a member of the University of Halle, and that
with very honorable testimonials. I thus obtained permission to preach
in the Lutheran Establishment; but I was as truly unhappy and as far
from God as ever. I had made strong resolutions now at last to change my
course of life, for two reasons: first, because, without it, I thought
no parish would choose me as their pastor; and secondly, that without a
considerable knowledge of divinity I should never get a good living. But
the moment I entered Halle, the university town, all my resolutions came
to nothing. Being now more than ever my own master, I renewed my
profligate life afresh, though now a student of _divinity_. Yet in the
midst of it all I had a desire to renounce this wretched life, for I had
no enjoyment in it, and had sense enough left to see that the end, one
day or other, would be miserable. But I had no sorrow of heart on
account of offending God.

One day, when I was in a tavern with some of my wild fellow-students, I
saw among them one of my former school-fellows, named Beta, whom I had
known four years before at Halberstadt, but whom at that time I had
despised, because he was so quiet and serious. It now appeared well to
me to choose him as my friend, thinking that, if I could but have better
companions, I should by that means improve my own conduct. "_Cursed be
the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm._"

This Beta was a backslider. When formerly he was so quiet at school, I
have reason to believe it was because the Spirit of God was working on
his heart; but now, having departed from the Lord, he tried to put off
the ways of God more and more, and to enjoy the world of which he had
known but little before. _I_ sought his friendship, because I thought it
would lead me to a steady life; and _he_ gladly formed an acquaintance
with me, as he told me afterwards, because he thought it would bring him
into gay society.

At the commencement of August, Beta and I, with two other students,
drove about the country for four days. When we returned, instead of
being truly sorry on account of this sin, we thought of fresh pleasures;
and as my love for travelling was stronger than ever, through what I had
seen on this last journey, I proposed to my friends to set off for
Switzerland. The obstacles in the way, the want of money, and the want
of the passports, were removed by _me_. For, through forged letters from
our parents, we procured passports, and through pledging all we could,
particularly our books, we obtained as much money as we thought would be
enough. Forty-three days we were day after day travelling, almost always
on foot.

I had now obtained the desire of my heart. I had seen Switzerland. But
still I was far from being happy. I was on this journey like Judas; for,
having the common purse, I was a thief. I managed so that the journey
cost me but two thirds of what it cost my friends. I had, by many lies,
to satisfy my father concerning the travelling expenses. During the
three weeks I stayed at home, I determined to live differently for the
future. I was different for a few days; but when the vacation was over,
and fresh students came, and, with them, fresh money, all was soon
forgotten.




CHAPTER II.

THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN.

1825-1826.

    A TREASURE FOUND--DAWNING OF THE NEW LIFE--THE PEACE OF GOD--"I
    AM COME TO SET A MAN AT VARIANCE AGAINST HIS FATHER"--"LET HIM
    THAT HEARETH SAY, COME"--THE FIRST SERMON--DELIGHT IN THE
    LORD--A COMMON ERROR--THE FOUNTAIN NEGLECTED.


The time was now come when God would have mercy upon me. At a time when
I was as careless about him as ever, he sent his Spirit into my heart. I
had no Bible, and had not read in it for years. I went to church but
seldom; but, from custom, I took the Lord's Supper twice a year. I had
never heard the gospel preached. I had never met with a person who told
me that he meant, by the help of God, to live according to the Holy
Scriptures. In short, I had not the least idea that there were any
persons really different from myself, except in degree.

On Saturday afternoon, about the middle of November, 1825, I had taken a
walk with my friend Beta. On our return he said to me that he was in the
habit of going on Saturday evenings to the house of a Christian, where
there was a meeting. On further inquiry, he told me that they read the
Bible, sang, prayed, and read a printed sermon. No sooner had I heard
this than it was to me as if I had found something after which I had
been seeking all my life long. We went together in the evening. As I did
not know the manners of believers, and the joy they have in seeing poor
sinners, even in any measure, caring about the things of God, I made an
apology for coming. The kind answer of the dear brother I shall never
forget. He said: "Come as often as you please; house and heart are open
to you." We sat down and sang a hymn. Then brother Kayser, now a
missionary in Africa, fell on his knees and asked a blessing on our
meeting. This kneeling down made a deep impression upon me; for I had
never either seen any one on his knees, nor had I ever myself prayed on
my knees. He then read a chapter and a printed sermon; for no regular
meetings for expounding the Scriptures were allowed in Prussia, except
an ordained clergyman was present. At the close we sang another hymn,
and then the master of the house prayed. Whilst he prayed, my feeling
was something like this: "I could not pray as well, though I am much
more learned than this illiterate man." The whole made a deep impression
on me. I was happy; though, if I had been asked why I was happy, I could
not have clearly explained it.

When we walked home, I said to Beta: "All we have seen on our journey to
Switzerland, and all our former pleasures, are as nothing in comparison
with this evening." Whether I fell on my knees when I returned home, I
do not remember; but this I know, that I lay peaceful and happy in my
bed. This shows that the Lord may begin his work in different ways. For
I have not the least doubt that on that evening he began a work of grace
in me, though I obtained joy without any deep sorrow of heart, and with
scarcely any knowledge. But that evening was the turning-point in my
life. The next day, and Monday, and once or twice besides, I went again
to the house of this brother, where I read the Scriptures with him and
another brother; for it was too long for me to wait till Saturday came
again.

Now my life became very different, though not so that all sins were
given up at once. My wicked companions were given up; the going to
taverns was entirely discontinued; the habitual practice of telling
falsehoods was no longer indulged in; but still a few times after this I
spoke an untruth. I read the Scriptures, prayed often, loved the
brethren, went to church from right motives, and stood on the side of
Christ, though laughed at by my fellow-students.

In January, 1826, I began to read missionary papers, and was greatly
stirred up to become a missionary myself. I prayed frequently concerning
this matter, and thus made more decided progress for a few weeks. About
Easter, 1826, I saw a devoted young brother, named Hermann Ball, a
learned man, and of wealthy parents, who, constrained by the love of
Christ, preferred laboring in Poland among the Jews as a missionary to
having a comfortable living near his relations. His example made a deep
impression on me. The Lord smiled on me, and I was, for the first time
in my life, able fully and unreservedly to give up myself to him.

At this time I began truly to enjoy the peace of God which passeth all
understanding. In my joy I wrote to my father and brother, entreating
them to seek the Lord, and telling them how happy I was; thinking that,
if the way to happiness were but set before them, they would gladly
embrace it. To my great surprise an angry answer was returned. About
this period the Lord sent a believer, Dr. Tholuck, as professor of
divinity to Halle, in consequence of which a few believing students came
from other universities. Thus also, through becoming acquainted with
other brethren, the Lord led me on.

My former desire to give myself to missionary service returned, and I
went at last to my father to obtain his permission, without which I
could not be received into any of the German missionary institutions. My
father was greatly displeased, and particularly reproached me, saying
that he had expended so much money on my education, in hope that he
might comfortably spend his last days with me in a parsonage, and that
he now saw all these prospects come to nothing. He was angry, and told
me he would no longer consider me as his son. But the Lord gave me grace
to remain steadfast. He then entreated me, and wept before me; yet even
this by far harder trial the Lord enabled me to bear. After I had left
my father, though I wanted more money than at any previous period of my
life, as I had to remain two years longer in the university, I
determined never to take any more from him; for it seemed to me wrong,
so far as I remember, to suffer myself to be supported by him, when he
had no prospect that I should become what he would wish me to be,
namely, a clergyman with a good living. This resolution I was enabled to
keep.

Shortly after this had occurred, several American gentlemen, three of
whom were professors in American colleges, came to Halle for literary
purposes, and, as they did not understand German, I was recommended by
Dr. Tholuck to teach them. These gentlemen, some of whom were believers,
paid so handsomely for the instruction which I gave them, and for the
lectures of certain professors which I wrote out for them, that I had
enough and to spare. Thus did the Lord richly make up to me the little
which I had relinquished for his sake. "_O fear the Lord, ye his saints;
for there is no want to them that fear him._"

Whitsuntide, and the two days following, I spent in the house of a pious
clergyman in the country; for all the ministers at Halle, a town of more
than twenty thousand inhabitants, were unenlightened men. God greatly
refreshed me through this visit. Dear Beta was with me. On our return we
related to two of our former friends, whose society we had not quite
given up, though we did not any longer live with them in sin, how happy
we had been on our visit. I then told them how I wished they were as
happy as ourselves. They answered, We do not feel that we are sinners.
After this I fell on my knees, and asked God to show them that they were
sinners. Having done so, I went into my bedroom, where I continued to
pray for them. After a little while, I returned to my sitting-room and
found them both in tears, and both told me that they now felt themselves
to be sinners. From that time a work of grace commenced in their hearts.

Though very weak and ignorant, yet I had now, by the grace of God, some
desire to benefit others, and he who so faithfully had once served
Satan, sought now to win souls for Christ. I circulated every month
about three hundred missionary papers. I also distributed a considerable
number of tracts, and often took my pockets full in my walks, and
distributed them, and spoke to poor people whom I met. I also wrote
letters to some of my former companions in sin. I visited, for thirteen
weeks, a sick man, who, when I first began to speak to him about the
things of God, was completely ignorant of his state as a sinner,
trusting for salvation in his upright and moral life. After some weeks,
however, the Lord allowed me to see a decided change in him, and he
afterwards repeatedly expressed his gratitude that I had been sent to
him by God to be the means of opening his blind eyes.

Having heard that there was a schoolmaster living in a village about six
miles from Halle, who was in the habit of holding a prayer meeting at
four o'clock every morning, with the miners, before they went into the
pit, giving them also an address, I thought he was a believer; and as I
knew so very few brethren, I went to see him, in order, if it might be,
to strengthen his hands. About two years afterwards, he told me that
when I came to him first he knew not the Lord, but that he had held
these prayer meetings merely out of kindness to a relative, whose office
it was, but who had gone on a journey; and that those addresses which
he had read were not his own, but copied out of a book. He also told me
that he was much impressed with my kindness, and what he considered
condescension on my part in coming to see him, and this, together with
my conversation, had been instrumental in leading him to care about the
things of God, and I knew him ever afterwards as a true brother.

This schoolmaster asked me whether I would not preach in his parish, as
the aged clergyman would be very glad of my assistance. Up to this time
I had never preached; yet I thought that by taking a sermon, or the
greater part of one, written by a spiritual man, and committing it to
memory, I might benefit the people. I set about putting a printed sermon
into a suitable form, and committing it to memory. There is no joy in
man's own doings and choosings. I got through it, but had no enjoyment
in the work. It was on August 27, 1826, at eight in the morning, in a
chapel of ease. There was one service more, in the afternoon, at which I
needed not to have done anything; but having a desire to serve the Lord,
though I often knew not how to do it scripturally, and knowing that this
aged and unenlightened clergyman had had this living for forty-eight
years, and having therefore reason to believe that the gospel scarcely
ever had been preached in that place, I had it in my heart to preach
again in the afternoon. It came to my mind to read the fifth chapter of
Matthew, and to make such remarks as I was able. I did so. Immediately
upon beginning to expound "Blessed are the poor in spirit," etc., I felt
myself greatly assisted; and whereas in the morning my sermon had not
been simple enough for the people to understand it, I now was listened
to with the greatest attention, and I think was also understood. My own
peace and joy were great. I felt this a blessed work.

On my way to Halle I thought, this is the way I should like always to
preach. But then it came immediately to my mind that such sort of
preaching might do for illiterate country people, but that it never
would do before a well-educated assembly in town. I thought the truth
ought to be preached at all hazards, but it ought to be given in a
different form, suited to the hearers. Thus I remained unsettled in my
mind as it regards the mode of preaching; and it is not surprising that
I did not then see the truth concerning this matter, for I did not
understand the work of the Spirit, and therefore saw not the
powerlessness of human eloquence. Further, I did not keep in mind that
if the most illiterate persons in the congregation can comprehend the
discourse, the most educated will understand it too; but that the
reverse does not hold true.

It was not till three years afterwards that I was led, through grace, to
see what I now consider the right mode of preparation for the public
preaching of the word. But about this, if God permit, I will say more
when I come to that period of my life.

It was about this time that I formed the plan of exchanging the
University of Halle for that of Berlin, on account of there being a
greater number of believing professors and students in the latter place.
But the whole plan was formed without prayer, or at least without
earnest prayer. When, however, the morning came on which I had to apply
for the university testimonials, the Lord graciously stirred me up
prayerfully to consider the matter; and finding that I had no sufficient
reason for leaving Halle, I gave up the plan, and have never had reason
to regret having done so.

The public means of grace by which I could be benefited were very few.
Though I went regularly to church when I did not preach myself, yet I
scarcely ever heard the truth; for there was no enlightened clergyman in
the town. And when it so happened that I could hear Dr. Tholuck, or any
other godly minister, the prospect of it beforehand, and the looking
back upon it afterwards, served to fill me with joy. _Now and then I
walked ten or fifteen miles to enjoy this privilege._

Another means of grace which I attended, besides the Saturday-evening
meetings in brother Wagner's house, was a meeting every Lord's-day
evening with the believing students, six or more in number, increased,
before I left Halle, to about twenty. In these meetings, one or two, or
more, of the brethren prayed, and we read the Scriptures, sang hymns,
and sometimes also one or another of the brethren spoke a little in the
way of exhortation, and we read also such writings of godly men as were
calculated for edification. I was often greatly stirred up and refreshed
in these meetings; and twice, being in a backsliding state, and
therefore cold and miserable, I opened my heart to the brethren, and was
brought out of that state through the means of their exhortations and
prayers.

As to the other means of grace, I would say, I fell into the snare into
which so many young believers fall, the reading of religious books in
preference to the Scriptures. I read tracts, missionary papers, sermons,
and biographies of godly persons. I never had been at any time of my
life in the habit of reading the Holy Scriptures. When under fifteen
years of age, I occasionally read a little of them at school; afterwards
God's precious book was entirely laid aside, so that I never read one
single chapter of it till it pleased God to begin a work of grace in my
heart. Now the scriptural way of reasoning would have been: God himself
has consented to be an author, and I am ignorant about that precious
book, which his Holy Spirit has caused to be written through the
instrumentality of his servants, and it contains that which I ought to
know, the knowledge of which will lead me to true happiness; therefore I
ought to read again and again this most precious book of books, most
earnestly, most prayerfully, and with much meditation; and in this
practice I ought to continue all the days of my life. But instead of
acting thus, my difficulty in understanding it, and the little enjoyment
I had in it, made me careless of reading it; and thus, like many
believers, I practically preferred, for the first four years of my
divine life, the works of uninspired men to the oracles of the living
God. The consequence was, that I remained a babe, both in knowledge and
grace.

The last and most important means of grace, prayer, was comparatively
but little used by me. I prayed, and prayed often, and in general, by
the grace of God, with sincerity; but had I prayed as earnestly as I
have of late years, I should have made much more rapid progress.




CHAPTER III.

SELF-DEDICATION.

1826-1829.

    DESIRE FOR MISSIONARY LABOR--PROVIDENTIAL RELEASE FROM MILITARY
    SERVICE--VISIT AT HOME--LED TO THE LAND OF HIS FUTURE
    LABORS--PROGRESS IN RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE--DESIRE FOR IMMEDIATE
    USEFULNESS.


In August, 1827, I heard that the Continental Society in England
intended to send a minister to Bucharest, the residence of many nominal
German Christians, to help an aged brother in the work of the Lord.
After consideration and prayer, I offered myself for this work to
Professor Tholuck, who was requested to look out for a suitable
individual; for with all my weakness I had a great desire to live wholly
for God. Most unexpectedly my father gave his consent, though Bucharest
was above a thousand miles from my home, and as completely a missionary
station as any other. I now prepared with earnestness for the work of
the Lord. I set before me the sufferings which might await me. And he
who once so fully served Satan was now willing, constrained by the love
of Christ, rather to suffer affliction for the sake of Jesus than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. I also prayed with a degree of
earnestness concerning my future work.

One day, at the end of October, the above-mentioned brother, Hermann
Ball, missionary to the Jews, stated that he feared, on account of his
health, he should be obliged to give up laboring among the Jews. When I
heard this, I felt a peculiar desire to fill up his place. About this
very time, also, I became exceedingly fond of the Hebrew language, which
I had cared about very little up to that time, and which I had merely
studied now and then, from a sense of duty. But now I studied it, for
many weeks, with the greatest eagerness and delight. Whilst I thus from
time to time felt a desire to fill up brother Ball's place, and whilst I
thus greatly delighted in the study of Hebrew, I called, in the evening
of November 17, on Dr. Tholuck. In the course of conversation he asked
me whether I had ever had a desire to be a missionary to the Jews, as I
might be connected with the London Missionary Society for promoting
Christianity among them, for which he was an agent. I was struck with
the question, and told him what had passed in my mind, but added that it
was not proper to think anything about that, as I was going to
Bucharest; to which he agreed.

When I came home, however, these few words were like fire within me. The
next morning I felt all desire for going to Bucharest gone, which
appeared to me very wrong and fleshly, and I therefore entreated the
Lord to restore to me the former desire for laboring on that missionary
station. He graciously did so almost immediately. My earnestness in
studying Hebrew, and my peculiar love for it, however, continued.

About ten days after, Dr. Tholuck received a letter from the
Continental. Society, stating, that on account of the war between the
Turks and Russians, it appeared well to the committee for the time being
to give up the thought of sending a minister to Bucharest, as it was the
seat of war between the two armies. Dr. Tholuck then asked me again what
I now thought about being a missionary to the Jews. My reply was that I
could not then give an answer, but that I would let him know, after I
had prayerfully considered the matter. After prayer and consideration,
and consulting with experienced brethren, in order that they might probe
my heart as to my motives, I came to this conclusion, that I ought to
offer myself to the committee, leaving it with the Lord to do with me
afterwards as it might seem good in his sight. Accordingly, Dr. Tholuck
wrote, about the beginning of December, 1827, to the committee in
London.

It was not before March, 1828, that he received an answer from London
respecting me, in which the committee put a number of questions to me,
on the satisfactory answers to which my being received by them would
depend. After replying to this first communication, I waited daily for
an answer, and was so much the more desirous of having it, as my course
in the university was completed. At last, on June 13, I received a
letter from London, stating that the committee had determined to take me
as a missionary student for six months on probation, provided that I
would come to London.

I had now had the matter before me about seven months, having supposed
not only that it would have been settled in a few weeks, but also, that,
if I were accepted, I should be sent out immediately, as I had passed
the university. Instead of this, not only seven months passed over
before the decision came, but I was also expected to come to London; and
not only so, but though I had from my infancy been more or less
studying, and now at last wished actively to be engaged, it was required
that I should again become a student. For a few moments, therefore, I
was greatly disappointed and tried. But on calmly considering the
matter, it appeared to me but right that the committee should know me
personally, and that it was also well for me to know them more
intimately than merely by correspondence, as this afterwards would make
our connection much more comfortable. I determined, therefore, after I
had seen my father, and found no difficulty on his part, to go to
London.

There was, however, an obstacle in the way of my leaving the country.
Every Prussian male subject is under the necessity of being for three
years a soldier, provided his state of body allows it; but those who
have had a classical education up to a certain degree, and especially
those who have passed the university, need to be only one year in the
army, but have to equip and maintain themselves during that year. I
could not obtain a passport out of the country till I had either served
my time or had been exempted by the king himself. The latter I hoped
would be the case; for it was a well-known fact that those who had given
themselves to missionary service had always been exempted. Certain
brethren of influence, living in the capital, to whom I wrote on the
subject, wrote to the king; but he replied that the matter must be
referred to the ministry and to the law, and no exception was made in my
favor.

My chief concern now was how I might obtain a passport for England,
through exemption from military duty. But the more certain brethren
tried, though they knew how to set about the matter, and were also
persons of rank, the greater difficulty there appeared to be in
obtaining my object; so that in the middle of January, 1829, it seemed
as if I must immediately become a soldier. There was now but one more
way untried, and it was at last resorted to. A believing major, who was
on good terms with one of the chief generals, proposed that I should
actually offer myself for entering the army, and that then I should be
examined as to my bodily qualifications, in the hope that, as I was
still in a very weak state of body, I should be found unfit for military
service. In that case it would belong to the chief general finally to
settle the matter; who, being a godly man himself, on the major's
recommendation, would, no doubt, hasten the decision, on account of my
desire to be a missionary to the Jews.

Thus far the Lord had allowed things to go, to show me, it appears, that
all my friends could not procure me a passport till his time was come.
But now it was come. The King of kings had intended that I should go to
England, because he would bless me there and make me a blessing, though
I was at that time, and am still, most unworthy of it; and, therefore,
though the king of Prussia had not been pleased to make an exemption in
my favor, yet now all was made plain, and that at a time when hope had
almost been given up, and when the last means had been resorted to. I
was examined, and was declared to be unfit for military service. With a
medical certificate to this effect, and a letter of recommendation from
the major, I went to this chief general, who received me very kindly,
and who himself wrote instantaneously to a second military physician,
likewise to examine me _at once_. This was done, and it was by him
confirmed that I was unfit. Now, the chief general himself, as his
adjutants happened to be absent, in order to hasten the matter, wrote,
with his own hands, the papers which were needed, and I got a complete
dismissal, and that for life, from all military engagements.

On February 5 I arrived at my father's house; it was the place where I
had lived as a boy, and the scene of many of my sins, my father having
now returned to it after his retirement from office. There were but
three persons in the whole town with whom my soul had any fellowship.
One of them was earning his daily bread by thrashing corn. As a boy I
had in my heart laughed at him. Now I sought him out, having been
informed that he was a brother, to acknowledge him as such, by having
fellowship with him, and attending a meeting in his house on the
Lord's-day evening. My soul was refreshed, and his also. Such a
spiritual feast as meeting with a brother was a rare thing to him.

I left my father's house on February 10, and about February 22 arrived
at Rotterdam. My going to England by the way of Rotterdam was not the
usual way; but, consulting with a brother in Berlin, who had been twice
in England, I was told that this was the cheapest route. My asking this
brother, to be profited by his experience, would have been quite right,
had I, besides this, like Ezra, sought of the Lord the right way.[12]
But I sought unto men only, and not at all unto the Lord, in this
matter. When I came to Rotterdam, I found that no vessels went at that
time from that port to London, on account of the ice having just broken
up in the river. Thus I had to wait nearly a month at Rotterdam, and
needed much more time than I should have required to go by way of
Hamburg, and also much more money.

  [Footnote 12: Then I proclaimed a fast, to seek of God a right way
  for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.--Ezra
  viii. 21.]

On March 19, 1829, I landed in London. Soon after my arrival, I heard
one of the brethren speak of Mr. Groves, a dentist, who, for the Lord's
sake, had given up his profession, which brought him in at least
£1,500[13] a year, and who intended to go as a missionary to Persia,
with his wife and children, simply trusting in the Lord for temporal
supplies. This made such an impression on me, and delighted me so, that
I not only marked it down in my journal, but also wrote about it to my
German friends.

  [Footnote 13: To avoid the necessity of reducing the sums named to
  federal money, it may be stated that a pound (£.) is equal to
  about $4.88, a sovereign to the same, a shilling (s.) to about 28
  cts. and a penny (d.) to 2 cts. For convenience of computation,
  when exactness is not required, we may call the pound $5.00, and
  the shilling 25 cts.--ED.]

I came to England weak in body, and, in consequence of much study, as I
suppose, I was taken ill on May 15, and was soon, at least in my own
estimation, apparently beyond recovery. The weaker I became in body, the
happier I was in spirit. Never in my whole life had I seen myself so
vile, so guilty, so altogether what I ought not to have been, as at this
time. It was as if every sin of which I had been guilty was brought to
my remembrance; but at the same time I could realize that all my sins
were completely forgiven,--that I was washed and made clean, completely
clean, in the blood of Jesus. The result of this was great peace. I
longed exceedingly to depart and be with Christ. When my medical
attendant came to see me, my prayer was something like this: "Lord, thou
knowest that he does not know what is for my real welfare, therefore do
thou direct him." When I took my medicine, my hearty prayer each time
was something like this: "Lord, thou knowest that this medicine is in
itself nothing, no more than as if I were to take a little water. Now
please, O Lord, to let it produce the effect which is for my real
welfare, and for thy glory. Let me either be taken soon to thyself, or
let me be soon restored; let me be ill for a longer time, and then taken
to thyself, or let me be ill for a longer time, and then restored. O
Lord, do with me as seemeth thee best!"

After I had been ill about a fortnight, my medical attendant
unexpectedly pronounced me better. As I recovered but slowly, my friends
entreated me to go into the country for change of air. I thought that it
might be the will of God that I should do so, and I prayed therefore
thus to the Lord: "Lord, I will gladly submit myself to thy will, and
go, if thou wilt have me to go. And now let me know thy will by the
answer of my medical attendant. If, in reply to my question, he says it
would be very good for me, I will go; but if he, says it is of no great
importance, then I will stay." When I asked him, he said that it was the
best thing I could do. I was then enabled willingly to submit, and
accordingly went to Teignmouth.

A few days after my arrival at Teignmouth, the chapel, called Ebenezer,
was reopened, and I attended the opening. I was much impressed by one of
those who preached on the occasion. For though I did not like all he
said, yet I saw a gravity and solemnity in him different from the rest.
After he had preached, I had a great desire to know more of him; and,
being invited by two brethren of Exmouth, in whose house he was staying,
to spend some time with them, I had an opportunity of living ten days
with him under the same roof. It was at this time that God began to show
me that his word alone is our standard of judgment in spiritual things;
that it can be explained only by the Holy Spirit; and that in our day,
as well as in former times, he is the teacher of his people. The office
of the Holy Spirit I had not experimentally understood before that time.
Indeed, of the office of each of the blessed persons, in what is
commonly called the Trinity, I had no experimental apprehension. I had
not before seen from the Scriptures that the Father chose us before the
foundation of the world; that in him that wonderful plan of our
redemption originated, and that he also appointed all the means by which
it was to be brought about. Further, that the Son, to save us, had
fulfilled the law, to satisfy its demands, and with it also the holiness
of God; that he had borne the punishment due to our sins, and had thus
satisfied the justice of God. And, further, that the Holy Spirit alone
can teach us about our state by nature, show us the need of a Saviour,
enable us to believe in Christ, explain to us the Scriptures, help us in
preaching, etc. It was my beginning to understand this latter point in
particular which had a great effect on me; for the Lord enabled me to
put it to the test of experience, by laying aside commentaries, and
almost every other book, and simply reading the word of God and studying
it. The result of this was, that the first evening that I shut myself
into my room, to give myself to prayer and meditation over the
Scriptures, I learned more in a few hours than I had done during a
period of several months previously. _But the particular difference was,
that I received real strength for my soul in doing so._ I now began to
try by the test of the Scriptures the things which I had learned and
seen, and found that only those principles which stood the test were
really of value.

My stay in Devonshire was most profitable to my soul. My prayer had
been, before I left London, that the Lord would be pleased to bless my
journey to the benefit of my body and soul. In the beginning of
September I returned to London, much better in body; and as to my soul,
the change was so great that it was like a second conversion. After my
return to London, I sought to benefit my brethren in the seminary, and
the means which I used were these: I proposed to them to meet together
every morning from six to eight for prayer and reading the Scriptures;
and that then each of us should give out what he might consider the Lord
had shown him to be the meaning of the portion read. One brother in
particular was brought into the same state as myself; and others, I
trust, were more or less benefited. Several times, when I went to my
room after family prayer in the evening, I found communion with God so
sweet that I continued in prayer till after twelve, and then, being full
of joy, went into the room of the brother just referred to; and finding
him also in a similar frame of heart, we continued praying until one or
two; and even then I was a few times so full of joy that I could
scarcely sleep, and at six in the morning again called the brethren
together for prayer.

After I had been for about ten days in London, and had been confined to
the house on account of my studies, my health began again to decline;
and I saw that it would not be well, my poor body being only like a
wreck or brand brought out of the devil's service, to spend my little
remaining strength in study, but that I now ought to set about actual
engagement in the Lord's work. I wrote to the committee of the Society,
requesting them to send me out at once; and, that they might do so more
comfortably, to send me as a fellow-laborer with an experienced brother.
However, I received no answer.

After having waited about five or six weeks, in the mean time seeking,
in one way or other, to labor for the Lord, it struck me that,
considering myself called by the Lord to preach the gospel, I ought to
begin at once to labor among the Jews in London, whether I had the title
of missionary or not. In consequence of this, I distributed tracts among
the Jews, with my name and residence written on them, thus inviting them
to conversation about the things of God; preached to them in those
places where they most numerously collect together; read the Scriptures
regularly with about fifty Jewish boys; and became a teacher in a Sunday
school. In this work I had much enjoyment, and the honor of being
reproached and ill-treated for the name of Jesus. But the Lord gave me
grace, never to be kept from the work by any danger, or the prospect of
any suffering.

    Mr. Müller was led, toward the close of 1829, to doubt the
    propriety of continuing under the patronage of the London
    Society. It seemed to him unscriptural for a servant of Christ
    to put himself under the control and direction of any one but
    the Lord. A correspondence with the Society, evincing on his
    part, and on their part, entire kindness and love, resulted in a
    dissolution of his relation to them. He was left free to preach
    the gospel wherever Providence might open the way.

On December 30, I went to Exmouth, where I intended to spend a fortnight
in the house of some Christian friends. I arrived at Exmouth on December
31, at six in the evening, an hour before the commencement of a
prayer-meeting at Ebenezer Chapel. My heart was burning with a desire to
tell of the Lord's goodness to my soul. Being, however, not called on,
either to speak or pray, I was silent. The next morning, I spoke on the
difference between being _a Christian_ and _a happy Christian_, and
showed whence it generally comes that we rejoice so little in the Lord.
This, my first testimony, was blessed to many believers, that God, as it
appears, might show me that he was with me. At the request of several
believers, I spoke again in the afternoon, and also proposed a meeting
in the chapel every morning at ten, to expound the epistle to the
Romans. The second day after my arrival, a brother said to me, "I have
been praying for this month past that the Lord would do something for
Lympstone, a large parish where there is little spiritual light. There
is a Wesleyan chapel, and I doubt not you would be allowed to preach
there." Being ready to speak of Jesus wherever the Lord might open a
door, yet so that I could be faithful to the truths which he had been
pleased to teach me, I went, and easily obtained liberty to preach twice
on the next day, being the Lord's day.




CHAPTER IV.

LEANING ON JESUS.

1830-1832.

    A DOOR OPENED--TOKENS FOR GOOD--TRUST EXERCISED IN THE STUDY AND
    MINISTRY OF THE WORD--THE SWORD OF THE SPIRIT--TRUSTING IN GOD
    FOR DAILY BREAD--BLESSEDNESS OF WAITING UPON THE LORD--"OWE NO
    MAN"--"ACCORDING TO YOUR FAITH BE IT UNTO YOU"--THE GIFT OF
    FAITH, AND THE GRACE OF FAITH.


After I had preached about three weeks at Exmouth and its neighborhood,
I went to Teignmouth, with the intention of staying there ten days, to
preach the word among the brethren with whom I had become acquainted
during the previous summer, and to tell them of the Lord's goodness to
me. In the evening, Monday, I preached for Brother Craik, at Shaldon, in
the presence of three ministers, none of whom liked the sermon; yet it
pleased God, through it, to bring to the knowledge of his dear Son a
young woman. How differently does the Lord judge from man! Here was a
particular opportunity for the Lord to get glory to himself. A foreigner
was the preacher, with great natural obstacles in the way, for he was
not able to speak English with fluency; but he had a desire to serve
God, and was by this time also brought into such a state of heart as to
desire that God alone should have the glory, if any good were done
through his instrumentality.

On Tuesday evening, I preached at Ebenezer Chapel, Teignmouth, the same
chapel at the opening of which I became acquainted with the brother whom
the Lord had afterwards used as an instrument of benefiting me so much.

    During the week ensuing, Mr. M. preached almost daily at the
    same place, a blessing attending his labors.

By this time, the request that I might stay at Teignmouth, and be the
minister of the above chapel, had been repeatedly expressed by an
increasing number of the brethren; but others were decidedly against my
remaining there. This opposition was instrumental in settling it in my
mind that I should stay for a while, at least until I was formally
rejected.

I preached again three times on the Lord's day, none saying we wish you
not to preach, though many of the hearers did not hear with enjoyment.
Some of them left, and never returned; some left, but returned after a
while. Others came to the chapel who had not been in the habit of
attending there previous to my coming. There was a great stir, a spirit
of inquiry, and a searching of the Scriptures, whether these things were
so. And, what is more than all, God set his seal upon the work, in
converting sinners. Twelve weeks I stood in this same position, whilst
the Lord graciously supplied my temporal wants, through two brethren,
unasked for. After this time, the whole little church, eighteen in
number, unanimously gave me an invitation to become their pastor. They
offered to supply my temporal wants by giving me fifty-five pounds a
year, which sum was afterwards somewhat increased, on account of the
increase of the church.

That which I now considered the best mode of preparation for the public
ministry of the word, no longer adopted from necessity, on account of
want of time, but from deep conviction, and from the experience of God's
blessing upon it, both as it regards my own enjoyment, the benefit of
the saints, and the conversion of sinners, is as follows: First, I do
not presume to know myself what is best for the hearers, and I therefore
ask the Lord, in the first place, that he would graciously be pleased to
teach me on what subject I shall speak, or what portion of his word I
shall expound. Now, sometimes it happens that, previous to my asking
him, a subject or passage has been in my mind, on which it has appeared
well for me to speak. In that case, I ask the Lord whether I should
speak on this subject or passage. If, after prayer, I feel persuaded
that I should, I fix upon it, yet so that I would desire to leave myself
open to the Lord to change it if he please. Frequently, however, it
occurs that I have no text or subject in my mind, before I give myself
to prayer for the sake of ascertaining the Lord's will concerning it. In
this case, I wait some time on my knees for an answer, trying to listen
to the voice of the Spirit to direct me. If, then, a passage or subject,
whilst I am on my knees, or after I have finished praying for a text, is
brought to my mind, I again ask the Lord, and that sometimes repeatedly,
especially if, humanly speaking, the subject or text should be a
peculiar one, whether it be his will that I should speak on such a
subject or passage. If, after prayer, my mind is peaceful about it, I
take this to be the text, but still desire to leave myself open to the
Lord for direction, should he please to alter it, or should I have been
mistaken. Frequently, also, in the third place, it happens that I not
only have no text nor subject on my mind previous to my praying for
guidance in this matter, but also I do not obtain one after once, or
twice, or more times praying about it. I used formerly at times to be
much perplexed when this was the case, but, for more than twenty years,
it has pleased the Lord, in general at least, to keep me in peace about
it. What I do is, to go on with my regular reading of the Scriptures,
where I left off the last time, praying (whilst I read) for a text, now
and then also laying aside my Bible for prayer, till I get one. Thus it
has happened that I have had to read five, ten, yea, twenty chapters,
before it has pleased the Lord to give me a text; yea, many times I have
even had to go to the place of meeting without one, and obtained it,
perhaps, only a few minutes before I was going to speak; but I have
never lacked the Lord's assistance at the time of preaching, provided I
had earnestly sought it in private. The preacher cannot know the
particular state of the various individuals who compose the
congregation, nor what they require, but the Lord knows it; and if the
preacher renounces his own wisdom, he will be assisted by the Lord; but
if he will choose in his own wisdom, then let him not be surprised if he
should see little benefit result from his labors.

Before I leave this part of the subject, I would just observe one
temptation concerning the choice of a text. We may see a subject to be
so very full that it may strike us it would do for some other occasion.
For instance, sometimes a text brought to one's mind for a week-evening
meeting may appear more suitable for the Lord's day, because then there
would be a greater number of hearers present. Now, in the first place,
we do not know whether the Lord ever will allow us to preach on another
Lord's day; and, in the second place, we know not whether that very
subject may not be especially suitable for some or many individuals
present just that week-evening. Thus I was once tempted, after I had
been a short time at Teignmouth, to reserve a subject which had been
just opened to me for the next Lord's day. But being able, by the grace
of God, to overcome the temptation by the above reasons, and preaching
about it at once, it pleased the Lord to bless it to the conversion of
a sinner, and that, too, an individual who meant to come but that once
more to the chapel, and to whose case the subject was most remarkably
suited.

2. Now, when the text has been obtained in the above way, whether it be
one, or two, or more verses, or a whole chapter or more, I ask the Lord
that he would graciously be pleased to teach me by his Holy Spirit
whilst meditating over it. Within the last twenty-five years, I have
found it the most profitable plan to meditate with my pen in my hand,
writing down the outlines as the word is opened to me. This I do, not
for the sake of committing them to memory, nor as if I meant to say
nothing else, but for the sake of clearness, as being a help to see how
far I understand the passage. I also find it useful afterwards to refer
to what I have thus written. I very seldom use any other help besides
the little I understand of the original of the Scriptures, and some good
translations in other languages. My chief help is prayer. I have NEVER
in my life begun to study one single part of divine truth without
gaining some light about it when I have been able really to give myself
to prayer and meditation over it. But _that_ I have often found a
difficult matter, partly on account of the weakness of the flesh, and
partly, also, on account of bodily infirmities and multiplicity of
engagements. This I most firmly believe, that no one ought to expect to
see much good resulting from his labors in word and doctrine, if he is
not much given to prayer and meditation.

3. Having prayed and meditated on the subject or text, I desire to leave
myself entirely in the hands of the Lord. I ask him to bring to my mind
what I have seen in my closet concerning the subject I am going to speak
on, which he generally most kindly does, and often teaches me much
additionally whilst I am preaching.

In connection with the above, I must, however, state that it appears to
me there is a preparation for the public ministry of the word which is
even more excellent than the one spoken of. It is this; to live in such
_constant_ and _real_ communion with the Lord, and to be so _habitually_
and _frequently_ in meditation over the truth, that without the above
_effort_, so to speak, we have obtained food for others, and know the
mind of the Lord as to the subject or the portion of the word on which
we should speak.

That which I have found most beneficial in my experience for the last
twenty-six years in the public ministry of the word, is _expounding_ the
Scriptures, and especially the going now and then through a whole gospel
or epistle. This may be done in a twofold way, either by entering
minutely into the bearing of every point occurring in the portion, or by
giving the general outlines, and thus leading the hearers to see the
meaning and connection of the whole. The benefits which I have seen
resulting from _expounding_ the Scriptures, are these: 1. The hearers
are thus, with God's blessing, led to the Scriptures. They find, as it
were, _a practical_ use of them in the public meetings. This induces
them to bring their Bibles, and I have observed that those who at first
did not bring them, have afterwards been induced to do so; so that, in a
short time, few (of the believers at least) were in the habit of coming
without them. This is no small matter; for everything which in our day
will lead believers to value the Scriptures is of importance. 2. The
expounding of the Scriptures is in general more beneficial to the
hearers than if, on a single verse, or half a verse, or two or three
words of a verse, some remarks are made, so that the portion of
Scripture is scarcely anything but a motto for the subject; for few have
grace to meditate much over the word, and thus exposition may not merely
be the means of opening to them the Scriptures, but may also create in
them a desire to meditate for themselves. 3. The expounding of the
Scriptures leaves to the hearers a connecting link, so that the reading
over again the portion of the word which has been expounded brings to
their remembrance what has been said, and thus, with God's blessing,
leaves a more lasting impression on their minds. This is particularly of
importance as it regards the illiterate, who sometimes have neither much
strength of memory nor capacity of comprehension. 4. The _expounding_ of
large portions of the word as the whole of a gospel or an epistle,
besides leading the _hearer_ to see the connection of the whole, has
also this particular benefit for the _teacher_, that it leads him, with
God's blessing, to the consideration of portions of the word which
otherwise he might not have considered, and keeps him from speaking too
much on favorite subjects, and leaning too much to particular parts of
truth, which tendency must surely sooner or later injure both himself
and his hearers. Expounding the word of God brings little honor to the
preacher from the _unenlightened_ or _careless_ hearer, but it tends
much to the benefit of the hearers in general.

Simplicity in expression, whilst the truth is set forth, is, in
connection with what has been said, of the utmost importance. It should
be the aim of the teacher to speak so that children, servants, and
people who cannot read may be able to understand him, so far as the
natural mind can comprehend the things of God. It ought also to be
remembered that there is, perhaps, not a single congregation in which
there are not persons of the above classes present, and that if _they_
can understand, the well-educated or literary persons will understand
likewise; but the reverse does not hold good. It ought further to be
remembered that the expounder of the truth of God speaks for God, for
eternity, and that it is not in the least likely that he will benefit
the hearers, except he use plainness of speech, which nevertheless
needs not to be vulgar or rude. It should also be considered that if the
preacher strive to speak according to the rules of this world, he may
please many, particularly those who have a literary taste; but, in the
same proportion, he is less likely to become an instrument in the hands
of God for the conversion of sinners, or for the building-up of the
saints. For neither eloquence nor depth of thought makes the truly great
preacher, but such a life of prayer and meditation and spirituality as
may render him a vessel meet for the Master's use, and fit to be
employed both in the conversion of sinners and in the edification of the
saints.

    Becoming convinced, after a prayerful examination of the
    Scriptures, that baptism should be administered only by
    immersion, Mr. Müller was then baptized in the spring of 1830.

It was so usual for me to preach with particular assistance, especially
during the first months of this year, that once, when it was otherwise,
it was much noticed by myself and others. The circumstance was this. One
day, before preaching at Teignmouth, I had more time than usual, and
therefore prayed and meditated about six hours in preparation for the
evening meeting, and I thought I saw many precious truths in the passage
on which I had meditated. It was the first part of the first chapter of
the epistle to the Ephesians. After I had spoken a little time, I felt
that I spoke in my own strength, and I, being a foreigner, felt
particularly the want of words, which had not been the case before. I
told the brethren that I felt I was left to myself, and asked their
prayers. But after having continued a little longer, and feeling the
same as before, I closed, and proposed that we should have a meeting
for prayer, that the Lord still might be pleased to help me. We did so,
and I was particularly assisted the next time.

On October 7, 1830, I was united by marriage to Miss Mary Groves, sister
of the brother whose name has already been mentioned. This step was
taken after prayer and deliberation, from a full conviction that it was
better for me to be married; and I have never regretted since either the
step itself or the choice, but desire to be truly grateful to God for
having given me such a wife.

About this time, I began to have conscientious objections against any
longer receiving a stated salary. My reasons against it were these:

1. The salary was made up by pew-rents; but pew-rents are, according to
James ii. 1-6, against the mind of the Lord, as, in general, the poor
brother cannot have so good a seat as the rich. 2. A brother may
_gladly_ do something towards my support if left to his own time; but,
when the quarter is up, he has perhaps other expenses, and I do not know
whether he pays his money grudgingly, and of necessity, or cheerfully;
but God loveth a cheerful giver. Nay, _I knew it to be a fact_ that
sometimes it had not been convenient to individuals to pay the money
when it had been asked for by the brethren who collected it. 3. Though
the Lord had been pleased to give me grace to be faithful, so that I had
been enabled not to keep back the truth when he had shown it to me;
still, I felt that the pew-rents were a snare to the servant of Christ.
It was a temptation to me, at least for a few minutes, at the time when
the Lord had stirred me up to pray and search the word respecting the
ordinance of baptism, because thirty pounds of my salary was at stake if
I should be baptized.

For these reasons, I stated to the brethren, at the end of October,
1830, that I should for the future give up having any regular salary.
After I had given my reasons for doing so, I read Philippians iv., and
told the saints that if they still had a desire to do something towards
my support, by voluntary gifts, I had no objection to receive them,
though ever so small, either in money or provisions. A few days after,
it appeared to me that there was a better way still; for, if I received
personally every single gift offered in money, both my own time and that
of the donors would be much taken up; and in this way, also, the poor
might, through temptation, be kept from offering their pence, a
privilege of which they ought not to be deprived; and some also might in
this way give more than if it were not known who was the giver, so that
it would still be doubtful whether the gift were given grudgingly or
cheerfully. For these reasons especially, there was a box put up in the
chapel, over which was written that whoever had a desire to do something
towards my support might put his offering into the box.

At the same time, it appeared to me right that henceforth I should ask
no man, not even my beloved brethren and sisters, to help me, as I had
done a few times, according to their own request, as my expenses, on
account of travelling much in the Lord's service, were too great to be
met by my usual income. For, unconsciously, I had thus again been led,
in some measure, to trust in an arm of flesh, going to man instead of
going to the Lord at once. _To come to this conclusion before God
required more grace than to give up my salary._

About the same time, also, my wife and I had grace given to us to take
the Lord's commandment, "Sell that ye have, and give alms," Luke xii.
33, literally, and to carry it out. Our staff and support in this matter
were Matthew vi. 19-34, John xiv. 13, 14. We leaned on the arm of the
Lord Jesus. It is now twenty-five years since we set out in this way,
and _we do not in the least regret the step we then took_. As I have
written down how the Lord has been pleased to deal with us since, I
shall be able to relate some facts concerning this matter, as far as
they may tend to edification.

Nov. 18, 1830. Our money was reduced to about eight shillings. When I
was praying with my wife in the morning, the Lord brought to my mind the
state of our purse, and I was led to ask him for some money. About four
hours after, a sister said to me, "Do you want any money?" "I told the
brethren," said I, "dear sister, when I gave up my salary, that I would
for the future tell the Lord _only_ about my wants." She replied, "But
he has told me to give you some money. About a fortnight ago, I asked
him what I should do for him, and he told me to give you some money; and
last Saturday it came again powerfully to my mind, and has not left me
since, and I felt it so forcibly last night that I could not help
speaking of it to brother P." My heart rejoiced, seeing the Lord's
faithfulness, but I thought it better not to tell her about our
circumstances, lest she should be influenced to give accordingly; and I
also was assured that, if it were of the Lord, she could not but give. I
therefore turned the conversation to other subjects, but when I left she
gave me two guineas. We were full of joy on account of the goodness of
the Lord. I would call upon the reader to admire the gentleness of the
Lord, that he did not try our faith much at the commencement, but
allowed us to see his willingness to help us, before he was pleased to
try it more fully.

The next Wednesday I went to Exmouth, our money having then again been
reduced to about nine shillings. I asked the Lord on Thursday, when at
Exmouth, to be pleased to give me some money. On Friday morning, about
eight o'clock, whilst in prayer, I was particularly led to ask again for
money; and before I rose from my knees I had the fullest assurance that
we should have the answer that very day. About nine o'clock I left the
brother with whom I was staying, and he gave me half a sovereign,
saying, "Take this for the expenses connected with your coming to us." I
did not expect to have my expenses paid, but I saw the Lord's fatherly
hand in sending me this money within one hour after my asking him for
some. But even then I was so fully assured that the Lord would send more
that very day, or had done so already, that, when I came home about
twelve o'clock, I asked my wife whether she had received any letters.
She told me she had received one the day before from a brother in
Exeter, with three sovereigns. Thus even my prayer on the preceding day
had been answered. The next day one of the brethren came and brought me
four pounds, which was due to me of my former salary, but which I could
never have expected, as I did not even know that this sum was due to me.
Thus I received, within thirty hours, in answer to prayer, seven pounds
ten shillings.

About Christmas, when our money was reduced to a few shillings, I asked
the Lord for more; when, a few hours after, there was given to us a
sovereign by a brother from Axminster. This brother had heard much
against me, and was at last determined to hear for himself, and thus
came to Teignmouth, a distance of forty miles; and having heard about
our manner of living, gave us this money.

With this closes the year 1830. Throughout it the Lord richly supplied
all my temporal wants, though at the commencement of it I had no certain
human prospect for one single shilling: so that, even as it regards
temporal things, I had not been in the smallest degree a loser in acting
according to the dictates of my conscience; and as it regards spiritual
things, the Lord had dealt bountifully with me, and had condescended to
use me as an instrument in doing his work.

On the 6th, 7th, and 8th of Jan. 1831, I had repeatedly asked the Lord
for money, but received none. On the evening of January 8, I left my
room for a few minutes, and was then tempted to distrust the Lord,
though he had been so gracious to us in that he not only, up to that
day, had supplied all our wants, but had given us also those answers of
prayer which have been in part just mentioned. I was so sinful, for
about five minutes, as to think it would be of no use to trust in the
Lord in this way. I also began to say to myself, that I had perhaps gone
too far in living in this way. But, thanks to the Lord! this trial
lasted but a few minutes. He enabled me again to trust in him, and Satan
was immediately confounded; for when I returned to my room, out of which
I had not been absent ten minutes, the Lord had sent deliverance. A
sister in the Lord had brought us two pounds four shillings: so the Lord
triumphed, and our faith was strengthened.

Jan. 10. To-day, when we had again but a few shillings, five pounds were
given to us, which had been taken out of the box. I had, once for all,
told the brethren, who had the care of these temporal things, to have
the kindness to let me have the money every week; but as these beloved
brethren either forgot to take it out weekly, or were ashamed to bring
it in such small sums, it was generally taken out every three, four, or
five weeks. As I had stated to them, however, from the commencement,
that I desired to look neither to man nor the box, but to the living
God, I thought it not right on my part to remind them of my request to
have the money weekly, lest it should hinder the testimony which I
wished to give, of trusting in the living God alone. It was on this
account that on January 28, when we had again but little money, though I
had seen the brethren, on January 24, open the box and take out the
money, I would not ask the brother, in whose hands it was, to let me
have it; but standing in need of it, as our coals were almost gone, I
asked the Lord to incline his heart to bring it; and but a little time
afterwards it was given to us; even one pound eight shillings and
sixpence.

I would here mention, that, since the time I began living in this way, I
have been kept from speaking, either directly or indirectly, about my
wants, at the time I was in need. The only exception is, that in a few
instances, twenty years or more since, I have, at such times, spoken to
_very poor_ brethren, in the way of encouraging them to trust in the
Lord, telling them that I had to do the same, being myself in similar
straits; or, in a few instances, where it was needful to speak about my
own want, lest I should appear unfeeling, in that I did not help at all,
in cases of distress, or not as much as might have been expected.

On February 14 we had again very little money, and, whilst praying, I
was led to ask the Lord graciously to supply our wants; and _the instant
that I got up from my knees_ a brother gave me one pound, which had been
taken out of the box.

On March 7, I was again tempted to disbelieve the faithfulness of the
Lord, and though I was not miserable, still, I was not so fully resting
upon the Lord that I could triumph with joy. It was _but one hour
after_, when the Lord gave me another proof of his faithful love. A
Christian lady brought five sovereigns for us, with these words written
in the paper: "I was an hungered, and ye gave _me_ meat; I was thirsty,
and ye gave _me_ drink," etc.

April 16. This morning I found that our money was reduced to three
shillings; and I said to myself, I must now go and ask the Lord
earnestly for fresh supplies. But before I had prayed, there was sent
from Exeter two pounds, as a proof that the Lord hears before we call.

I would observe here, by the way, that if any of the children of God
should think that such a mode of living leads away from the Lord, and
from caring about spiritual things, and has the effect of causing the
mind to be taken up with the question, What shall I eat?--What shall I
drink?--and Wherewithal shall I be clothed?--I would request him
prayerfully to consider the following remarks: 1. I have had experience
of both ways, and know that my present mode of living, as to temporal
things, is connected with less care. 2. Confidence in the Lord, to whom
alone I look for the supply of my temporal wants, keeps me, when a case
of distress comes before me, or when the Lord's work calls for my
pecuniary aid, from anxious reckoning like this: Will my salary last
out? Shall I have enough myself the next month? etc. In this my freedom,
I am, by the grace of God, generally, at least, able to say to myself
something like this: My Lord is not limited; he can again supply; he
knows that this present case has been sent to me: and thus, this way of
living, so far from _leading to anxiety_, is rather the means of
_keeping from it_. And truly it was once said to me by an
individual,--You can do such and such things, and need not to lay by,
for the church in the whole of Devonshire cares about your wants. My
reply was: The Lord can use not merely any of the saints throughout
Devonshire, but those throughout the world, as instruments to supply my
temporal wants. 3. This way of living has often been the means of
reviving the work of grace in my heart, when I have been getting cold;
and it also has been the means of bringing me back again to the Lord,
after I have been backsliding. For it will not do,--it is not possible
to live in sin, and at the same time, by communion with God, to draw
down from heaven everything one needs for the life that now is. 4.
Frequently, too, a fresh answer to prayer, obtained in this way, has
been the means of quickening my soul, and filling me with much joy.

May 12. A sister has been staying for some time at Teignmouth on account
of her health; and when she was about to return home to-day, we saw it
the Lord's will to invite her to stay with us for some time; as we knew
that she would stay longer if her means allowed it. We were persuaded
that, as we saw it to be the Lord's will to invite her, he himself would
pay the expenses connected with her stay. About the time when she came
to our house, a parcel with money was sent from Chumleigh. A few weeks
before, I had preached at Chumleigh and in the neighborhood. The
brethren, knowing about my manner of living, after my departure
collected some money for me, and thus, in small offerings (one hundred
and seven altogether, as I have been told), two pounds and one penny
halfpenny were given. Thus the Lord paid for the expenses connected with
our sister's staying with us.

June 12. Lord's day. On Thursday last I went with brother Craik to
Torquay, to preach there. I had only about three shillings with me, and
left my wife with about six shillings at home. I asked the Lord
repeatedly for money; but when I came home my wife had only about three
shillings left, having received nothing. We waited still upon the Lord.
Yesterday passed away, and no money came. We had ninepence left. This
morning we were still waiting upon the Lord, and looking for
deliverance. We had only a little butter left for breakfast, sufficient
for brother E. and a relative living with us, to whom we did not mention
our circumstances, that they might not be made uncomfortable. After the
morning meeting, brother Y. most unexpectedly opened the box, and, in
giving me quite as unexpectedly the money at such a time, he told me
that _he and his wife could not sleep last night, on account of thinking
that we might want money_. The most striking point is, that after I had
repeatedly asked the Lord, but received nothing, _I then prayed
yesterday that the Lord would be pleased to impress it on brother Y.
that we wanted money, so that he might open the box_. There was in it
one pound eight shillings and tenpence halfpenny.

November 16. This morning I proposed united prayer respecting our
temporal wants. Just as we were about to pray, a parcel came from
Exmouth. In prayer we asked the Lord for meat for dinner, having no
money to buy any. After prayer, on opening the parcel, we found, among
other things, a ham, sent by a brother at Exmouth, which served us for
dinner.

November 19. We had not enough to pay our weekly rent; but the Lord
graciously sent us again to-day fourteen shillings and sixpence. I would
just observe, that we never contract debts, which we believe to be
unscriptural (according to Romans xiii. 8); and therefore we have no
bills with our tailor, shoemaker, grocer, butcher, baker, etc.; but all
we buy we pay for in ready money. The Lord helping us, we would rather
suffer privation than contract debts. Thus we always know how much we
have, and how much we have a right to give away. I am well aware that
many trials come upon the children of God, on account of not acting
according to Rom. xiii. 8.

November 27. Lord's day. Our money had been reduced to two pence
halfpenny; our bread was hardly enough for this day. I had several times
brought our need before the Lord. After dinner, when I returned thanks,
I asked him to give us our daily bread, meaning literally that he would
send us bread for the evening. Whilst I was praying, there was a knock
at the door of the room. After I had concluded, a poor sister came in,
and brought us some of her dinner, and from another poor sister five
shillings. In the afternoon she also brought us a large loaf. Thus the
Lord not only literally gave us bread but also money.

After we had, on December 31, 1831, looked over the Lord's gracious
dealings with us during the past year, in providing for all our temporal
wants, we had about ten shillings left. A little while after, the
providence of God called for that, so that not a single farthing
remained. Thus we closed the old year, in which the Lord had been so
gracious in giving to us, without our asking any one,--1. Through the
instrumentality of the box, thirty-one pounds fourteen shillings. 2.
From brethren of the church at Teignmouth, in presents of money, six
pounds eighteen shillings and sixpence. 3. From brethren living at
Teignmouth and elsewhere, not connected with the church at Teignmouth,
ninety-three pounds six shillings and twopence. Altogether, one hundred
and thirty-one pounds eighteen shillings and eightpence. There had been
likewise many articles of provision, and some articles of clothing given
to us, worth at least twenty pounds. I am so particular in mentioning
these things, to show that we are never losers from acting according to
the mind of the Lord. For had I had my regular salary, humanly speaking,
I should not have had nearly as much; but whether this would have been
the case or not, this is plain, that I have not served a hard master,
and that is what I delight to show.

January 7, 1832. We had been again repeatedly asking the Lord to-day and
yesterday to supply our temporal wants, having no means to pay our
weekly rent, and this evening, as late as eleven o'clock, a brother gave
us nineteen shillings and sixpence,--a proof that the Lord is not
limited to time.

January 14. This morning we had nothing but dry bread with our tea; only
the second time since we have been living by simple faith upon Jesus for
temporal supplies. We have more than forty pounds of ready money in the
house for two bills,[14] which will not be payable for several weeks;
but we do not consider this money to be our own, and would rather suffer
great privation, God helping us, than take of it. We were looking to our
Father, and he has not suffered us to be disappointed. For when now we
had but threepence left, and only a small piece of bread, we received
two shillings and five shillings.

  [Footnote 14: One bill I had to meet for a brother, the other was
  for money which, in the form of a bill, I had sent to the
  Continent; but in both cases the money was in my hands before the
  bills were given.]

February 18. This afternoon I broke a bloodvessel in my stomach, and
lost a considerable quantity of blood. I was very happy immediately
afterwards. February 19. This morning, Lord's day, two brethren called
on me, to ask me what arrangement there should be made to-day, as it
regarded the four villages, where some of the brethren were in the habit
of preaching, as, on account of my not being able to preach, one of the
brethren would need to stay at home to take my place. I asked them,
kindly, to come again in about an hour, when I would give them an
answer. After they were gone, the Lord gave me faith to rise. I dressed
myself; and determined to go to the chapel. I was enabled to do so,
though so weak when I went, that walking the short distance to the
chapel was an exertion to me. I was enabled to preach this morning with
as loud and strong a voice as usual, and for the usual length of time.
After the morning meeting, a medical friend called on me, and entreated
me not to preach again in the afternoon, as it might greatly injure me.
I told him that I should indeed consider it great presumption to do so
had the Lord not given me faith. I preached again in the afternoon, and
this medical friend called again, and said the same concerning the
evening meeting. Nevertheless, having faith, I preached again in the
evening. After each meeting I became stronger, which was a plain proof
that the hand of God was in the matter.

February 20. The Lord enabled me to rise early in the morning, and to go
to our usual prayer meeting, where I read, spoke, and prayed. Afterwards
I wrote four letters, expounded the Scriptures at home, and attended the
meeting again in the evening. February 21. I attended the two meetings
as usual, preached in the evening, and did my other work besides.
February 22. To-day I attended the meeting in the morning, walked
afterwards six miles with two brethren, and rode to Plymouth. February
23. I am now as well as I was before I broke the bloodvessel. In
relating the particulars of this circumstance, I would earnestly warn
every one who may read this not to imitate me in such a thing if he has
no faith; but if he has, it will, as good coin, most assuredly be
honored by God. I could not say that if such a thing should happen again
I would act in the same way; for when I have been not nearly so weak as
when I had broken the bloodvessel, having no faith, I did not preach;
yet, if it were to please the Lord to give me faith, I might be able to
do the same, though even still weaker than at the time just spoken of.

About this time I repeatedly prayed with sick believers till they were
restored. _Unconditionally_ I asked the Lord for the blessing of bodily
health (a thing which I could not do now), and almost always had the
petition granted. In some instances, however, the prayer was not
answered. In the same way, whilst in London, November, 1829, in answer
to my prayers, I was immediately restored from a bodily infirmity under
which I had been laboring for a long time, and which has never returned
since. The way in which I now account for these facts is as follows. It
pleased the Lord, I think, to give me in such cases something like the
gift (not grace) of faith, so that unconditionally I could ask and look
for an answer. The difference between the _gift_ and the _grace_ of
faith seems to me this. According to _the gift of faith_, I am able to
do a thing, or believe that a thing will come to pass, the not doing of
which, or the not believing of which, _would not be sin_; according to
_the grace of faith_, I am able to do a thing, or believe that a thing
will come to pass, respecting which I have the word of God as the ground
to rest upon, and, therefore, the not doing it, or the not believing it,
_would be sin_. For instance, _the gift of faith_ would be needed to
believe that a sick person should be restored again, though there is no
human probability, for _there is no promise to that effect_; _the grace
of faith_ is needed to believe that the Lord will give me the
necessaries of life, if I first seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, for _there is a promise to that effect_.[15]

  [Footnote 15: Matt. vi.]

March 18. These two days we have not been able to purchase meat. The
sister in whose house we lodge gave us to-day part of her dinner. We are
still looking to Jesus for deliverance. We want money to pay the weekly
rent and to buy provisions. March 19. Our landlady sent again of her
meat for our dinner. We have but a halfpenny left. I feel myself very
cold in asking for money: still, I hope for deliverance, though I do not
see whence money is to come. We were not able to buy bread to-day as
usual. March 20. This has been again a day of very great mercies. In the
morning we met round our breakfast which the Lord had provided for us,
though we had not a single penny left. The last halfpenny was spent for
milk. We were then still looking to Jesus for fresh supplies. We both
had no doubt that the Lord would interfere. I felt it a trial that I had
but little earnestness in asking the Lord, and had this not been the
case, perhaps we might have had our wants sooner supplied. We have
about seven pounds in the house; but considering it no longer our own,
the Lord kept us from taking of it, with the view of replacing what we
had taken, as formerly I might have done. The meat which was sent
yesterday for our dinner was enough also for to-day. Thus the Lord had
provided another meal. Two sisters called upon us about noon, who gave
us two pounds of sugar, one pound of coffee, and two cakes of chocolate.
Whilst they were with us, a poor sister came and brought us one shilling
from herself and two shillings and sixpence from another poor sister.
Our landlady also sent us again of her dinner, and also a loaf. Our
bread would scarcely have been enough for tea, had the Lord not thus
graciously provided. In the afternoon, the same sister who brought the
money brought us also, from another sister, one pound of butter and two
shillings, and from another sister five shillings.




CHAPTER V.

MINISTRY AT BRISTOL BEGUN.

1832-1835.

    "HERE HAVE WE NO CONTINUING CITY"--CAUTION TO THE CHRISTIAN
    TRAVELLER--NEW TOKENS FOR GOOD--THE WAY MADE CLEAR--MEETINGS FOR
    INQUIRY--NO RESPECT OF PERSONS WITH GOD--FRANCKE, "BEING DEAD,
    YET SPEAKETH"--DAILY BREAD SUPPLIED--A PECULIAR PEOPLE.


April 8. I have felt much this day that Teignmouth is no longer my
place, and that I shall leave it. I would observe that in August of 1831
I began greatly to feel as if my work at Teignmouth were done, and that
I should go somewhere else. I was led to consider the matter more
maturely, and at last had it settled in this way,--that it was not
likely to be of God, because, for certain reasons, I should _naturally_
have liked to leave Teignmouth. Afterwards, I felt quite comfortable in
remaining there. In the commencement of the year 1832 I began again much
to doubt whether Teignmouth was my place, or whether my gift was not
much more that of going about from place to place, seeking to bring
believers back to the Scriptures, than to stay in one place and to labor
as a pastor. I resolved to try whether it were not the will of God that
I should still give myself to pastoral work among the brethren at
Teignmouth; and with more earnestness and faithfulness than ever I was
enabled to give myself to this work, and was certainly much refreshed
and blessed in it; and I saw immediately blessings result from it. This
my experience seemed more than ever to settle me at Teignmouth. But
notwithstanding this, the impression that my work was done there came
back after some time, as the remark in my journal of April 8 shows, and
it became stronger and stronger. There was one point remarkable in
connection with this. Wherever I went I preached with much more
enjoyment and power than at Teignmouth, the very reverse of which had
been the case on my first going there. Moreover, almost everywhere I had
many more hearers than at Teignmouth, and found the people hungering
after food, which, generally speaking, was no longer the case at
Teignmouth.

April 11. Felt again much that Teignmouth will not much longer be my
residence. April 12. Still feel the impression that Teignmouth is no
longer my place. April 13. Found a letter from brother Craik, from
Bristol, on my return from Torquay, where I had been to preach. He
invites me to come and help him. It appears to me, from what he writes,
that such places as Bristol more suit my gifts. O Lord, teach me! I have
felt this day more than ever that I shall soon leave Teignmouth. I fear,
however, there is much connected with it which savors of the flesh, and
that makes me fearful. It seems to me as if I should shortly go to
Bristol, if the Lord permit. April 14. Wrote a letter to brother Craik,
in which I said I should come, if I clearly saw it to be the Lord's
will. Have felt again very much to-day, yea, far more than ever, that I
shall soon leave Teignmouth.

April 15. Lord's day. This evening I preached, as fully as time would
permit, on the Lord's second coming. After having done so, I told the
brethren what effect this doctrine had had upon me, on first receiving
it, even to determine me to leave London, and to preach throughout the
kingdom; but that the Lord had kept me chiefly at Teignmouth for these
two years and three months, and that it seemed to me now that the time
was near when I should leave them. I reminded them of what I told them
when they requested me to take the oversight of them, that I could make
no certain engagement, but stay only so long with them as I should see
it to be the Lord's will to do so. There was much weeping afterwards.
But I am now again in peace.

April 16. This morning I am still in peace. I am glad I have spoken to
the brethren, that they may be prepared, in case the Lord should take me
away. I left to-day for Dartmouth, where I preached in the evening. I
had five answers to prayer to-day. 1. I awoke at five, for which I had
asked the Lord last evening. 2. The Lord removed from my dear wife an
indisposition under which she had been suffering. It would have been
trying to me to have had to leave her in that state. 3. The Lord sent us
money. 4. There was a place vacant on the Dartmouth coach, which only
passes through Teignmouth. 5. This evening I was assisted in preaching,
and my own soul refreshed.

April 21. I would offer here a word of warning to believers. Often the
work of the Lord itself may be a temptation to keep us from that
communion with him which is so essential to the benefit of our own
souls. On the 19th I had left Dartmouth, conversed a good deal that day,
preached in the evening, walked afterwards eight miles, had only about
five hours' sleep, travelled again the next day twenty-five miles,
preached twice, and conversed very much besides, went to bed at eleven,
and arose before five. All this shows that my body and spirit required
rest, and, therefore, however careless about the Lord's work I might
have appeared to my brethren, I ought to have had a great deal of quiet
time for prayer and reading the word, especially as I had a long journey
before me that day, and as I was going to Bristol, which in itself
required much prayer. Instead of this, I hurried to the prayer meeting,
after a few minutes' private prayer. But let none think that public
prayer will make up for closet communion. Then again, afterwards, when I
ought to have withdrawn myself, as it were, by force, from the company
of beloved brethren and sisters, and given my testimony for the Lord,
(and, indeed, it would have been the best testimony I could have given
them,) by telling them that I needed secret communion with the Lord, I
did not do so, but spent the time, till the coach came, in conversation
with them. Now, however profitable in some respects it may have been
made to those with whom I was on that morning, yet my own soul needed
food; and not having had it, I was lean, and felt the effects of it the
whole day; and hence I believe it came that I was dumb on the coach, and
did not speak a word for Christ, nor give away a single tract, though I
had my pockets full on purpose.

April 22. This morning I preached at Gideon Chapel, Bristol. In the
afternoon I preached at the Pithay Chapel. This sermon was a blessing to
many, many souls; and many were brought through it to come afterwards to
hear brother Craik and me. Among others it was the means of converting a
young man who was a notorious drunkard, and who was just again on his
way to a public house, when an acquaintance of his met him, and asked
him to go with him to hear a foreigner preach. He did so; and from that
moment he was so completely altered, that he never again went to a
public house, and was so happy in the Lord afterwards that he often
neglected his supper, from eagerness to read the Scriptures, as his wife
told me. He died about five months afterwards. This evening I was much
instructed in hearing brother Craik preach. I am now fully persuaded
that Bristol is the place where the Lord will have me to labor.

April 27. It seems to brother Craik and myself the Lord's will that we
should go home next week, in order that in quietness, without being
influenced by what we see here, we may more inquire into the Lord's will
concerning us. It especially appears to us much more likely that we
should come to a right conclusion among the brethren and sisters in
Devonshire, whose tears we shall have to witness, and whose entreaties
to stay with them we shall have to hear, than here in Bristol, where we
see only those who wish us to stay.

April 28. It still seems to us the Lord's will that we should both leave
soon, to have quiet time for prayer concerning Bristol. April 29. I
preached this morning on Rev. iii. 14-22. As it afterwards appeared,
that testimony was blessed to many, though I lacked enjoyment in my own
soul. This afternoon brother Craik preached in a vessel called the
Clifton Ark, fitted up for a chapel. In the evening I preached in the
same vessel. These testimonies also God greatly honored, and made them
the means of afterwards bringing several, who then heard us, to our
meeting places. How was God with us, and how did he help us, thereby
evidently showing that he himself had sent us to this city!

April 30. It was most affecting to take leave of the dear children of
God, dozens pressing us to return soon, many with tears in their eyes.
The blessing which the Lord has given to our ministry seems to be very
great. We both see it fully the Lord's will to come here, though we do
not see under what circumstances. A brother has promised to take
Bethesda Chapel for us, and to be answerable for the payment of the
rent; so that thus we should have two large chapels. I saw, again, two
instances to-day in which my preaching has been blessed.

May 1. Brother Craik and I left this morning for Devonshire.

May 3. I saw several of the brethren to-day, and felt so fully assured
that it is the Lord's will that I should go to Bristol, that I told them
so. This evening I had a meeting with the three deacons, when I told
them plainly about it; asking them, if they see anything wrong in me
concerning this matter, to tell me of it. They had nothing to say
against it; yea, though much wishing me to stay, they were convinced
themselves that my going is of God.

May 5. One other striking proof to my mind that my leaving Teignmouth is
of God, is, that some truly spiritual believers, though they much wish
me to stay, themselves see that I ought to go to Bristol.

May 7. Having received a letter from Bristol on May 5, it was answered
to-day in such a way that the Lord may have another opportunity to
prevent our going thither if it be not of him.

May 15. Just when I was in prayer concerning Bristol, I was sent for to
come to brother Craik. Two letters had arrived from Bristol. The
brethren assembling at Gideon accept our offer to come under the
conditions we have made, _i. e._ for the present, to consider us only as
ministering among them, but not in any fixed pastoral relationship, so
that we may preach as we consider it to be according to the mind of God,
_without reference to any rules among them; that the pew-rents should be
done away with; and that we should go on, respecting the supply of our
temporal wants, as in Devonshire_. We intend, the Lord willing, to leave
in about a week, though there is nothing settled respecting Bethesda
Chapel.

May 21. I began to-day to take leave of the brethren at Teignmouth,
calling on each of them. It has been a trying day. Much weeping on the
part of the saints. Were I not so fully persuaded that it is the will of
God we should go to Bristol, I should have been hardly able to bear it.

May 22. The brethren at Teignmouth say that they expect us soon back
again. _As far as I understand the way in which God deals with his
children, this seems very unlikely._ Towards the evening, the Lord,
after repeated prayer, gave me Col. i. 21-23 as a text for the last word
of exhortation. It seemed to me best to speak as little as possible
about myself, and as much as possible about Christ. I scarcely alluded
to our separation, and only commended myself and the brethren, in the
concluding prayer, to the Lord. The parting scenes are very trying, but
my full persuasion is that the separation is of the Lord. May 23. My
wife, Mr. Groves, my father-in-law, and I left this morning for Exeter.
Dear brother Craik intends to follow us to-morrow.

We had unexpectedly received, just before we left Teignmouth, about
fifteen pounds, else we should not have been able to defray all the
expenses connected with leaving, travelling, etc. By this, also, the
Lord showed his mind concerning our going to Bristol.

The following record will now show to the believing reader how far what
I have said concerning my persuasion that it was the will of God that we
should go to Bristol has been proved by facts.

May 25, 1832. This evening we arrived at Bristol. May 27. This morning
we received a sovereign, sent to us by a sister residing in
_Devonshire_, which we take as an earnest that the Lord will provide for
us here also. May 28. When we were going to speak to the brethren, who
manage the temporal affairs of Gideon Chapel, about giving up the
pew-rents, having all the seats free, and receiving the free-will
offerings through a box, a matter which was not quite settled on their
part, as brother Craik and I had thought, we found that the Lord had so
graciously ordered this matter for us that there was not the least
objection on the part of these brethren.

June 4. For several days we have been looking about for lodgings, but
finding none plain and cheap enough, we were led to make this also a
subject of earnest prayer; and now, immediately afterwards, the Lord has
given us such as are suitable. We pay only eighteen shillings a week for
two sitting-rooms and three bedrooms, coals, and attendance. It was
particularly difficult to find _cheap_ furnished lodgings, having five
rooms in the same house, which we need, as brother Craik and we live
together. How good is the Lord to have thus appeared for us, in answer
to prayer, and what an encouragement to commit everything to him in
prayer!

June 25. To-day it was finally settled to take Bethesda Chapel for a
twelvemonth, on condition that a brother at once paid the rent, with the
understanding that, if the Lord shall bless our labors in that place, so
that believers are gathered together in fellowship, he expects them to
help him; but if not, that he will pay all. This was the only way in
which we could take the chapel; for we could not think it to be of God
to have had this chapel, though there should be every prospect of
usefulness, if it had made us in any way debtors.

July 6. To-day we commenced preaching at Bethesda Chapel. It was a good
day. July 13. To-day we heard of the first cases of cholera in Bristol.
July 16. This evening, from six to nine o'clock, we had appointed for
conversing at the vestry, one by one, with individuals who wished to
speak to us about their souls. There were so many that we were engaged
from six till twenty minutes past ten.

These meetings we have continued ever since, twice a week, or once a
week, or once a fortnight, or once a month, as our strength and time
allowed it, or as they seemed needed. We have found them beneficial in
the following respects:--

1. Many persons, on account of timidity, would prefer coming at an
appointed time to the vestry to converse with us, to calling on us in
our own house. 2. The very fact of appointing a time for seeing people,
to converse with them in private concerning the things of eternity, has
brought some, who, humanly speaking, never would have called upon us
under other circumstances; yea, it has brought even those who, though
they thought they were concerned about the things of God, yet were
completely ignorant; and thus we have had an opportunity of speaking to
them. 3. These meetings have also been a great encouragement to
ourselves in the work, for often, when we thought that such and such
expositions of the word had done no good at all, it was through these
meetings found to be the reverse; and likewise, when our hands were
hanging down, we have been afresh encouraged to go forward in the work
of the Lord, and to continue sowing the seed in hope, by seeing at these
meetings fresh cases in which the Lord has condescended to use us as
instruments, particularly as in this way instances have sometimes
occurred in which individuals have spoken to us about the benefit which
they derived from our ministry not only a few months before, but even as
long as two, three, and four years before.

For the above reasons I would particularly recommend to other servants
of Christ, especially to those who live in large towns, if they have not
already introduced a similar plan, to consider whether it may not be
well for them also to set apart such times for seeing inquirers. Those
meetings, however, require much prayer, to be enabled to speak aright to
all those who come, according to their different need; and one is led
continually to feel that one is not sufficient of one's self for these
things, but that our sufficiency can be alone of God. These meetings
also have been by far the most wearing-out part of all our work, though
at the same time the most refreshing.

July 18. To-day I spent the whole morning in the vestry, to procure a
quiet season. This has now for some time been the only way, on account
of the multiplicity of engagements, to make sure of time for prayer,
reading the word, and meditation. July 19. I spent from half past nine
till one in the vestry, and had real communion with the Lord. The Lord
be praised, who has put it into my mind to use the vestry for a place of
retirement!

August 5. _When all our money was gone to-day, the Lord again graciously
supplied our wants._ August 6. This afternoon, from two till after six,
brother Craik and I spent in the vestry, to see the inquirers. We have
had again, in seeing several instances of blessing upon our labors,
abundant reason brought before us to praise the Lord for having sent us
to Bristol.

August 13. This evening one brother and four sisters united with brother
Craik and me in church-fellowship at Bethesda, _without any rules,
desiring only to act as the Lord shall be pleased to give us light
through his word_.

September 17. This morning the Lord, in addition to all his other
mercies, has given us a little girl, who, with her mother, is doing
well.

October 1. A meeting for inquirers this afternoon from two to five. Many
more are convinced of sin through brother Craik's preaching than my own.
This circumstance led me to inquire into the reasons, which are probably
these: 1. That brother Craik is more spiritually minded than I am. 2.
That he prays more earnestly for the conversion of sinners than I do. 3.
That he more frequently addresses sinners, as such, in his public
ministrations, than I do. This led me to more frequent and earnest
prayer for the conversion of sinners, and to address them more
frequently as such. The latter had never been intentionally left undone,
but it had not been so frequently brought to my mind as to that of
brother Craik. Since then, the cases in which it has pleased the Lord
to use me as an instrument of conversion have been quite as many as
those in which brother Craik has been used.

February 9, 1833. I read a part of Franke's life. The Lord graciously
help me to follow him, as far as he followed Christ. Most of the Lord's
people whom we know in Bristol are poor, and if the Lord were to give us
grace to live more as this dear man of God did, we might draw much more
than we have as yet done out of our heavenly Father's bank, for our poor
brethren and sisters. March 2. A man in the street ran up to brother
Craik and put a paper containing ten shillings into his hand, saying,
"That is for you and Mr. Müller," and went hastily away. May 28. This
morning, whilst sitting in my room, the distress of several brethren and
sisters was brought to my mind, and I said to myself, "O that it might
please the Lord to give me means to help them!" About an hour afterwards
I received sixty pounds from a brother whom up to this day I never saw,
and who then lived, as he does still, a distance of several thousand
miles.

May 29. Review of the last twelve months, as it regards the fruits of
our labors in Bristol: 1. The total number of those added to us within
the year has been one hundred and nine. 2. There have been converted
through our instrumentality, _so far as we have heard and can judge
respecting the individuals_, sixty-five. 3. Many backsliders have been
reclaimed, and many of the children of God have been encouraged and
strengthened in the way of truth.

June 12. I felt, this morning, that we might do something for the souls
of those poor boys and girls, and grown-up or aged people, to whom we
have daily given bread for some time past, in establishing a school for
them, reading the Scriptures to them, and speaking to them about the
Lord. This desire was not carried out. The chief obstacle in the way was
a pressure of work coming upon brother Craik and me just about that
time. Shortly after, the number of the poor who came for bread increased
to between sixty and eighty a day, whereby our neighbors were molested,
as the beggars were lying about in troops in the street, on account of
which we were obliged to tell them no longer to come for bread. This
thought ultimately issued in the formation of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution, and in the establishment of the Orphan Houses.

December 17. This evening brother Craik and I took tea with a family of
whom five had been brought to the knowledge of the Lord through our
instrumentality. As an encouragement to brethren who may desire to
preach the gospel in a language not their own, I would mention that the
first member of this family who was converted came merely out of
curiosity to hear my foreign accent, some words having been mentioned to
her which I did not pronounce properly.

December 31. In looking over my journal, I find,--1. That at least two
hundred and sixty persons (according to the number of names we have
marked down, but there have been many more) have come to converse with
us about the concerns of their souls. Out of these, one hundred and
fifty-three have been added to us in fellowship these last eighteen
months, sixty of whom have been brought to the knowledge of the Lord
through our instrumentality.

2. In looking over the Lord's dealings with me as to temporal things, I
find that he has sent me, during the past year,--

 1. In freewill offerings through the boxes, _as my part_    £152 14 5¼
 2. Presents in money given to me                              25  1 3
 3. Presents in clothes and provisions, worth, at least        20  0 0
 4. A brother sent me, from a distance                         60  0 0
 5. We live free of rent, which is worth _for our part_        10  0 0
                                                             ----------
                                                             £267 15 8¼

It is just now four years since I first began to trust in the Lord alone
for the supply of my temporal wants. My little all I then had, at most
worth one hundred pounds a year, I gave up for the Lord, having then
nothing left but about five pounds. The Lord greatly honored this little
sacrifice, and he gave me, in return, not only as much as I had given
up, but considerably more. For during the first year, he sent me
already, in one way or other, including what came to me through family
connection, about one hundred and thirty pounds. During the second year,
one hundred and fifty-one pounds eighteen shillings and eight pence.
During the third year, one hundred and ninety-five pounds three
shillings. During this year, two hundred and sixty-seven pounds fifteen
shillings and eight and one fourth pence. The following points require
particular notice: 1. During the last three years and three months I
never have asked any one for anything; but, by the help of the Lord, I
have been enabled at all times to bring my wants to him, and he
graciously has supplied them all. 2. At the close of each of these four
years, though my income has been comparatively great, I have had only a
few shillings or nothing at all left; and thus it is also to-day, by the
help of God. 3. During the last year a considerable part of my income
has come from a distance of several thousand miles, from a brother whom
I never saw. 4. Since we have been obliged to discontinue the giving
away of bread to about fifty poor people every day, on account of our
neighbors, our income has not been during the second part of this year
nearly so great, scarcely one half as much, as during the first part of
it.

January 9, 1834. Brother Craik and I have preached during these eighteen
months, once a month, at Brislington, a village near Bristol, but have
not seen any fruit of our labors there. This led me to-day very
earnestly to pray to the Lord for the conversion of sinners in that
place. I was also, in the chapel, especially led to pray again about
this, and asked the Lord in particular that he would be pleased to
convert, at least, one soul this evening, that we might have a little
encouragement. I preached with much help, and I hope there has been good
done this evening. The Lord did according to my request. There was a
young man brought to the knowledge of the truth.

January 14. I was greatly tried by the difficulty of fixing upon a text
from which to preach on the morning of October 20, and at last preached
without enjoyment. To-day I heard of a NINTH instance in which this very
sermon has been blessed.

January 31. This evening a Dorcas Society was formed among the sisters
in communion with us, but not according to the manner in which we found
one when we came to Bristol; for, as we have dismissed all teachers from
the Sunday School who were not real believers, so now believing females
only will meet together to make clothes for the poor. The being mixed up
with unbelievers had not only proved a barrier to spiritual conversation
among the sisters, but must have been also injurious to both parties in
several respects. One sister, now united to us in fellowship,
acknowledged that the being connected with the Dorcas Society, previous
to her conversion, had been, in a measure, the means of keeping her in
security; as she thought that, by helping on such like things, she might
gain heaven at last. O that the saints, in _faithful_ love, according to
the word of God (2 Cor. vi. 14-18), might be more separated in all
spiritual matters from unbelievers, and not be unequally yoked together
with them!




CHAPTER VI.

THE SCRIPTURAL KNOWLEDGE INSTITUTION.

1834-1835.

    UNSCRIPTURAL CHARACTER OF THE EXISTING RELIGIOUS AND BENEVOLENT
    SOCIETIES--A NEW INSTITUTION PROPOSED--GOD'S WORD THE ONLY RULE,
    AND GOD'S PROMISE THE ONLY DEPENDENCE--"IN EVERYTHING, LET YOUR
    REQUEST BE MADE KNOWN UNTO GOD"--EARNEST OF THE DIVINE BLESSING
    ON THE INSTITUTION--BEREAVEMENT--HELPER SEASONABLY SENT--REWARD
    OF SEEKING GOD'S FACE.


Feb. 21. I was led this morning to form a plan for establishing, upon
scriptural principles, an institution for the spread of the gospel at
home and abroad. I trust this matter is of God. Feb. 25. I was led again
this day to pray about the forming of a new Missionary Institution, and
felt still more confirmed that we should do so.

[Some readers may ask why we formed a _new_ Institution for the spread
of the gospel, and why we did not unite with some of the religious
societies, already in existence, seeing that there are several
missionary, Bible, tract, and school societies. I give, therefore, our
reasons, in order to show that nothing but the desire to maintain a good
conscience led us to act as we have done. For as, by the grace of God,
we acknowledged the word of God as the only rule of action for the
disciples of the Lord Jesus, we found, in comparing the then existing
religious societies with the word of God, that they departed so far
from it, that we could not be united with them, and yet maintain a good
conscience. I only mention here the following points.

1. The _end_ which these religious societies propose to themselves, and
which is constantly put before their members, is, that the world will
gradually become better and better, and that at last the whole world
will be converted. To this end, there is constantly reference made to
the passage in Habakkuk ii. 14: "For the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea;" or the
one in Isaiah xi. 9: "For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." But that these passages can have
no reference to the present dispensation, but to the one which will
commence with the return of the Lord,--that in the present dispensation
things will not become spiritually better, but rather worse,--and that
in the present dispensation it is not the whole world that will be
converted, but only a people gathered out from among the Gentiles for
the Lord,--is clear from many passages of the divine testimony, of which
I only refer to the following: Matt. xiii. 24-30, and verses 36-43, 2
Tim. iii. 1-13, Acts xv. 14.

A hearty desire for the conversion of sinners, and earnest prayer for it
to the Lord, is quite _scriptural_; but it is _unscriptural_ to expect
the conversion of the whole world. _Such an end_ we could not propose to
ourselves in the service of the Lord.

2. But that which is worse, is, the connection of those religious
societies with the world, which is completely contrary to the word of
God (2 Cor. vi. 14-18). In temporal things the children of God need,
whilst they remain here on earth, to make use of the world; but when the
work to be done requires that those who attend to it should be possessed
of spiritual life (of which unbelievers are utterly destitute), the
children of God are bound, by their loyalty to their Lord, entirely to
refrain from association with the unregenerate. But, alas! the
connection with the world is but too marked in these religious
societies; for every one who pays a guinea, or, in some societies,
half-a-guinea, is considered as a member. Although such an individual
may live in sin; although he may manifest to every one that he does not
know the Lord Jesus; if only the guinea or the half-guinea be paid, he
is considered a member, and has a right as such to vote. Moreover,
whoever pays a larger sum, for instance, ten pounds or twenty pounds,
can be, in many societies, a member for life, however openly sinful his
life should be for the time, or should become afterwards. Surely such
things ought not to be.

3. The means which are made use of in these religious societies to
obtain money for the work of the Lord are also in other respects
unscriptural; for it is a most common case _to ask_ the _unconverted_
for money, which even Abraham would not have done (Genesis xiv. 21-24);
and how much less should _we_ do it, who are not only forbidden to have
fellowship with unbelievers in all such matters (2 Cor. vi. 14-18), but
who are also in fellowship with the Father and the Son, and can
therefore obtain everything from the Lord which we possibly can need in
his service, without being obliged to go to the unconverted world! How
altogether differently the first disciples acted, in this respect, we
learn from 3 John 7.

4. Not merely, however, in these particulars is there a connection with
the world in these religious societies; but it is not a rare thing for
even committee members (the individuals who manage the affairs of the
societies) to be manifestly unconverted persons, if not open enemies to
the truth; and this is suffered because they are rich, or of influence,
as it is called.

5. It is a most common thing to endeavor to obtain for patrons and
presidents of these societies and for chairmen at the public meetings,
persons of rank or wealth, to attract the public. Never once have I
known a case of a POOR, but very devoted, wise, and experienced servant
of Christ being invited to fill the chair at such public meetings.
Surely, the Galilean fishermen, who were apostles, or our Lord himself,
who was called the carpenter, would not have been called to this office,
according to these principles. These things ought not so to be among the
disciples of the Lord Jesus, who should not judge with reference to a
person's fitness for service in the church of Christ by the position he
fills in the world, or by the wealth he possesses.

6. Almost all these societies contract debts, so that it is a
comparatively rare case to read a report of any of them without finding
that they have expended more than they have received, which, however, is
contrary both to the spirit and to the letter of the New Testament.
(Rom. xiii. 8.)

Now, although brother Craik and I were ready, by the grace of God,
heartily to acknowledge that there are not only many true children of
God connected with these religious societies, but that the Lord has also
blessed their efforts in many respects, notwithstanding the existence of
these and other principles and practices which we judged to be
unscriptural; yet it appeared to us to be his will that we should be
entirely separate from these societies, (though we should be considered
as singular persons, or though it should even appear that we despised
other persons, or would elevate ourselves above them,) in order that, by
the blessing of God, we might direct the attention of the children of
God in those societies to their unscriptural practices; and we would
rather be entirely unconnected with these societies than act contrary to
the Holy Scriptures. We therefore separated entirely from them, although
we remained united in brotherly love with individual believers
belonging to them, and would by no means judge them for remaining in
connection with them, if they do not see that such things are contrary
to Scripture. But seeing them to be so ourselves, we could not with a
clear conscience remain. After we had thus gone on for some time, we
considered that it would have an injurious tendency upon the brethren
among whom we labored, and also be at variance with the spirit of the
gospel of Christ, if we did nothing at all for missionary objects, the
circulation of the Holy Scriptures, tracts, etc., and we were therefore
led, for these and other reasons, to do something for the spread of the
gospel at home and abroad, however small the beginning might be.]

March 5. This evening, at a public meeting, brother Craik and I stated
the principles on which we intend to carry on the institution which we
propose to establish for the spread of the gospel at home and abroad.
There was nothing outwardly influential either in the number of people
present or in our speeches. May the Lord graciously be pleased to grant
his blessing upon the institution, which will be called "The Scriptural
Knowledge Institution, for Home and Abroad."


I. THE PRINCIPLES OF THE INSTITUTION.

1. We consider every believer bound, in one way or other, to help the
cause of Christ, and we have scriptural warrant for expecting the Lord's
blessing upon our work of faith and labor of love; and although,
according to Matt. xiii. 24-43, 2 Tim. iii. 1-13, and many other
passages, the world will not be converted before the coming of our Lord
Jesus, still, while he tarries, all scriptural means ought to be
employed for the ingathering of the elect of God.

2. The Lord helping us, we do not mean to seek the patronage of the
world; _i. e._ we never intend to ask _unconverted_ persons of rank or
wealth to countenance this Institution, because this, we consider, would
be dishonorable to the Lord. In the name of our God we set up our
banners, Ps. xx. 5; he alone shall be our patron, and if he helps us we
shall prosper, and if he is not on our side we shall not succeed.

3. We do not mean to _ask_ unbelievers for money (2 Cor. vi. 14-18);
though we do not feel ourselves warranted to refuse their contributions,
if they of their own accord should offer them. Acts xxviii. 2-10.

4. We reject altogether the help of unbelievers in managing or carrying
on the affairs of the Institution. 2 Cor. vi. 14-18.

5. We intend never to enlarge the field of labor by contracting debts
(Rom. xiii. 8), and afterwards appealing to the Church of Christ for
help, because this we consider to be opposed both to the letter and the
spirit of the New Testament; but in secret prayer, God helping us, we
shall carry the wants of the Institution to the Lord, and act according
to the means that God shall give.

6. We do not mean to reckon the success of the Institution by the amount
of money given, or the number of Bibles distributed, etc., but by the
Lord's blessing upon the work (Zech. iv. 6); and we expect this in the
proportion in which he shall help us to wait upon him in prayer.

7. While we would avoid aiming after needless singularity, we desire to
go on simply according to Scripture, without compromising the truth; at
the same time thankfully receiving any instruction which experienced
believers, after prayer, upon scriptural ground, may have to give us
concerning the Institution.


II. THE OBJECTS OF THE INSTITUTION.

1. To _assist_ day schools, Sunday schools, and adult schools, in which
instruction is given upon _scriptural principles_, and as far as the
Lord may give the means, and supply us with suitable teachers, and in
other respects make our path plain, to establish schools of this kind.
With this we also combine _the putting of poor children to such day
schools_.

_a._ By day schools upon scriptural principles, we understand day
schools in which the teachers are godly persons,--in which the way of
salvation is scripturally pointed out,--and in which no instruction is
given opposed to the principles of the gospel.

_b._ Sunday schools, in which all the teachers are believers, and in
which the Holy Scriptures are alone the foundation of instruction, are
such only as the Institution assists with the supply of Bibles,
Testaments, etc.; for we consider it unscriptural that any persons who
do not profess to know the Lord themselves should be allowed to give
religious instruction.

_c._ The Institution does not assist any adult school with the supply of
Bibles, Testaments, spelling-books, etc., except the teachers are
believers.

2. To circulate the Holy Scriptures.

3. The third object of this Institution is to aid missionary efforts.

We desire to assist those missionaries whose proceedings appear to be
most according to the Scriptures.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 7. To-day we have only one shilling left. This evening, when we
came home from our work, we found a brother, our tailor, waiting for us,
who brought a new suit of clothes both for brother Craik and me, which a
brother, whose name was not to be mentioned, had ordered for us.

April 23. Yesterday and to-day I had asked the Lord to send us twenty
pounds, that we might be able to procure a larger stock of Bibles and
Testaments than our small funds of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution
would allow us to purchase; and this evening a sister, unasked, promised
to give us that sum, adding that she felt a particular pleasure in
circulating the Holy Scriptures, as the simple reading of them had been
the means of bringing her to the knowledge of the Lord.

June 8. Lord's day. I obtained no text yesterday, notwithstanding
repeated prayer and reading of the word. This morning I awoke with these
words: "My grace is sufficient for thee." As soon as I had dressed
myself, I turned to 2 Cor. xii. to consider this passage; but in doing
so, after prayer, I was led to think that I had not been directed to
this portion for the sake of speaking on it, as I at first thought, and
I therefore followed my usual practice in such cases, _i. e._ to read on
in the Scriptures where I left off last evening. In doing so, when I
came to Heb. xi. 13-16, I felt that this was the text. Having prayed, I
was confirmed in it, and the Lord was pleased to open this passage to
me. I preached on it with great enjoyment. It pleased God greatly to
bless what I said on that passage, and at least one soul was brought
through it to the Lord.

June 25. These last three days I have had very little real communion
with God, and have therefore been very weak spiritually, and have
several times felt irritability of temper.

June 26. I was enabled, by the grace of God, to rise early, and I had
nearly two hours in prayer before breakfast. I feel now this morning
more comfortable.

July 11. I have prayed much about a master for boys' school, to be
established in connection with our little Institution. Eight have
applied for the situation, but none seemed to be suitable. Now, at
last, the Lord has given us a brother, who will commence the work.

October 9. Our little Institution, established in dependence upon the
Lord, and supplied by him with means, has now been seven months in
operation, and through it have been benefited with instruction,--1. In
the Sunday school, about 120 children. 2. In the adult school, about 40
adults. 3. In the two day schools for boys and the two days schools for
girls, 209 children, of whom 54 have been entirely free; the others pay
about one third of the expense. There have been also circulated 482
Bibles and 520 New Testaments. Lastly, fifty-seven pounds has been spent
to aid missionary exertion. The means which the Lord has sent us, as the
fruit of many prayers, during these seven months, amount to one hundred
and sixty-seven pounds ten shillings and halfpenny.

October 28. We heard a most affecting account of a poor little orphan
boy who for some time attended one of our schools, and who seems there,
as far as we can judge, to have been brought to a real concern about his
soul, through what I said concerning the torments of hell, and who some
time ago was taken to the poorhouse, some miles out of Bristol. He has
expressed great sorrow that he can no longer attend our school and
ministry. May this, if it be the Lord's will, lead me to do something
also for the supply of the _temporal_ wants of poor children, the
pressure of which has caused this poor boy to be taken away from our
school!

November 4. I spent the greater part of the morning in reading the word
and in prayer, and asked also for our daily bread, for we have scarcely
any money left. November 5. I spent almost the whole of the day in
prayer and reading the word. I prayed also again for the supply of our
temporal wants, but the Lord has not as yet appeared. November 8.
Saturday. The Lord has graciously again supplied our temporal wants
during this week, though at the commencement of it we had but little
left. I have prayed much this week, for money, more than any other week,
as far as I remember, since we have been in Bristol. The Lord has
supplied us through our selling what we did not need, or by our being
paid what was owed to us.

December 10. To-day we found that a departed brother had left both to
brother Craik and me twelve pounds.

December 31, 1834. 1. Since brother Craik and I have been laboring in
Bristol, 227 brethren and sisters have been added to us in fellowship.
Out of the 227 who have been added to us, 103 have been converted
through our instrumentality, and many have been brought into the liberty
of the gospel, or reclaimed from backsliding. Forty-seven young converts
are at Gideon, and fifty-six at Bethesda. 2. The income which the Lord
has given me during this year is:--

 1. My part of the freewill offerings through the boxes,  £135 13 2¼

 2. Money given to me by saints in and out of Bristol       92  7 6
                                                          -------------
    Altogether                                            £228  0 8¼

 3. Besides this, many articles in provisions, clothing,
     and furniture, worth to us about                       60  0 0

January 1, 1835. We had last evening an especial prayer meeting, for the
sake of praising the Lord for all his many mercies, which we have
received during the past year, and to ask him to continue to us his
favor. January 13. I visited from house to house the people living in
Orange Street, and saw in this way the families living in nine houses,
to ascertain whether any individuals wanted Bibles, whether they could
read, whether they wished their children put to our day schools or
Sunday school, with the view of helping them accordingly. This afforded
opportunities to converse with them about their souls.

January 15. This morning I went again from house to house in Orange
Street. I should greatly delight in being frequently engaged in such
work, for it is a most important one; but our hands are so full with
other work that we can do but little in this way. January 21. Received,
in answer to prayer, from an unexpected quarter, five pounds, for the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution. The Lord pours in, whilst we seek to
pour out. For during the past week, merely among the poor, in going from
house to house, fifty-eight copies of the Scriptures were sold at
reduced prices, the going on with which is most important, but will
require much means.

January 28. I have, for these several days, prayed much to ascertain
whether the Lord will have me to go as a missionary to the East Indies,
and I am most willing to go, if he will condescend to use me in this
way. January 29. I have been greatly stirred up to pray about going to
Calcutta as a missionary. May the Lord guide me in this matter! (After
all my repeated and earnest prayer in the commencement of 1835, and
willingness on my part to go, if it were the Lord's will, still, he did
not send me.)

February 25. In the name of the Lord, and in dependence upon him alone
for support, we have established a fifth day school for poor children,
which to-day has been opened. We have now two boys' schools and three
girls' schools.

    Mr. Müller having determined to visit Germany, chiefly on
    missionary business, reached London February 27, and writes:--

This morning I went to the Alien Office for my passport. On entering the
office, I saw a printed paper, in which it is stated that every alien
neglecting to renew every six months his certificate of residence, which
he receives on depositing his passport, subjects himself to a penalty
of fifty pounds, or imprisonment. This law I have ignorantly broken ever
since I left London, in 1829. It appeared to me much better to confess
at once that I had ignorantly done so than now wilfully break it;
_trusting in the Lord as it regarded the consequences of the step_. I
did so, and _the Lord inclined the heart of the officer with whom I had
to do to pass over my non-compliance with the law, on account of my
having broken it ignorantly_. Having obtained my passport, I found an
unexpected difficulty in the Prussian ambassador refusing to sign it, as
it did not contain a description of my person, and therefore I needed to
prove that I was the individual spoken of in the passport. This
difficulty was not removed for three days, when, _after earnest prayer_,
through a paper signed by some citizens of London, to whom I am known,
the ambassador was satisfied. This very difficulty, when once the Lord
had removed it, afforded me cause for thanksgiving; for I now obtained a
_new_ passport, worded in a way that, should I ever need it again, will
prevent similar difficulties.

    Mr. Müller was absent for five weeks, during which time he
    experienced many answers to prayer and encouragements to faith.

April 15. Bristol. Yesterday, at one, we landed in London. In answer to
prayer, I soon obtained my things from the custom-house, and reached my
friends in Chancery Lane a little before two.

June 3. To-day we had a public meeting on account of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad. It is now fifteen months
since, in dependence upon the Lord for the supply of means, we have been
enabled to provide poor children with schooling, circulate the Holy
Scriptures, and aid missionary labors. During this time, though the
field of labor has been continually enlarging, and though we have now
and then been brought low in funds, the Lord has never allowed us to be
obliged to stop the work. We have been enabled during this time to
establish three day schools, and to connect with the Institution two
other charity day schools, which, humanly speaking, otherwise would have
been closed for want of means. The number of the children that have been
thus provided with schooling, in the day schools only, amounts to 439.
The number of copies of the Holy Scriptures which have been circulated
is 795 Bibles and 753 New Testaments. We have also sent, in aid of
missionary labors in Canada, in the East Indies, and on the Continent of
Europe, one hundred and seventeen pounds, eleven shillings. The whole
amount of the free-will offerings put into our hands for carrying on
this work from March 5, 1834, to May 19, 1835, is £363 12s. 0¾d.

June 22. This morning at two my father-in-law died. June 25. Our little
boy is so ill that I have no hope of his recovery. The Lord's holy will
be done concerning the dear little one. June 26. My prayer, last
evening, was, that God would be pleased to support my dear wife under
the trial, should he remove the little one; and to take him soon to
himself, thus sparing him from suffering. I did not pray for the child's
recovery. It was but two hours after that the dear little one went home.
I am so fully enabled to realize that the dear infant is so much better
off with the Lord Jesus than with us, that I scarcely feel the loss at
all, and when I weep I weep for joy.

July 18. I have felt for several days weak in my chest. This weakness
has been increasing, and to-day I have felt it more than ever. I have
thought it well to refrain next week from all public speaking. May the
Lord grant that I may be brought nearer to him through this, for I am
not at all in the state in which I ought to be, and I think sometimes
that our late afflictions have been lost upon me, and that the Lord will
need to chastise me severely.

July 31. To-day brother C----r, formerly a minister in the
establishment, who came to us a few days since, began, in connection
with the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, to go from house to house to
spread the truth as a city missionary. [This was a remarkable
interposition of God. Brother Craik had before this, for some months,
been unable, on account of bodily infirmity, to labor in the work of the
schools, the circulation of the Scriptures, etc., and my own weakness,
shortly after brother C----r's arrival, increased so that I was obliged
to give up the work entirely. How gracious, therefore, of the Lord to
send brother C----r, that thus the work might go on! Up to July, 1837,
this beloved brother was enabled to continue in his work, and thus this
little Institution was in a most important way enlarged as it regards
the field of labor.]

August 24. I feel very weak, and suffer more than before from the
disease. I am in doubt whether to leave Bristol entirely for a time. I
have no money to go away for a change of air. I have had an invitation
to stay for a week with a sister in the country, and I think of
accepting the invitation, and going to-morrow. August 26. To-day I had
five pounds given to me _for the express purpose of using change of
air_. August 29. To-day I received another five pounds _for the same
purpose_.

August 30. To-day, for the first Lord's day since our arrival in
Bristol, I have been kept from preaching through illness. How mercifully
has the Lord dealt in giving me so much strength for these years! I had
another five pounds sent _to aid me in procuring change of air_. How
kind is the Lord in thus providing me with the means for leaving
Bristol! September 2. Went with my family to Portishead.

September 15. As I clearly understood that the person who lets me his
horse has no license, I saw that, being bound as a believer to act
according to the laws of the country, I could use it no longer; and as
horse exercise seems most important, humanly speaking, for my
restoration, and as this is the only horse which is to be had in the
place, we came to the conclusion to leave Portishead to-morrow.
_Immediately after_, I received a kind letter from a brother and two
sisters in the Lord, who live in the Isle of Wight, which contained a
fourth invitation, more pressing than ever, to come and stay with them
for some time. In addition to this, they wrote that they had repeatedly
prayed about the matter, and were persuaded that I ought to come. This
matter has been to-day a subject for prayer.

September 16. We came this morning to the conclusion that _I_ should go
to the Isle of Wight; but we saw not how my wife and child and our
servant could accompany me, as we had not sufficient money for
travelling expenses; and yet this seemed of importance. The Lord
graciously removed the difficulty this evening; for we received, _most
unexpectedly and unasked for_, five pounds and thirteen shillings, which
was owed to us, and also, when we had already retired to rest, a letter
was brought, containing a present of two pounds. How very, very kind and
tender is the Lord!

September 19. This evening we arrived at our friends' in the Isle of
Wight, by whom we were most kindly received.

September 29. Last evening, when I retired from the family, I had a
desire to go to rest at once, for I had prayed a short while before; and
feeling weak in body, the coldness of the night was a temptation to me
to pray no further. However, the Lord did help me to fall upon my knees;
and no sooner had I commenced praying than he shone into my soul, and
gave me such a spirit of prayer as I had not enjoyed for many weeks. He
graciously once more revived his work in my heart. I enjoyed that
nearness to God and fervency in prayer, for more than an hour, for which
my soul had been panting for many weeks past. For the first time, during
this illness, I had now also a spirit of prayer as regards my health. I
could ask the Lord earnestly to restore me again, which had not been the
case before. I now long to go back again to the work in Bristol, yet
without impatience, and feel assured that the Lord will strengthen me to
return to it. I went to bed especially happy, and awoke this morning in
great peace, rose sooner than usual, and had again, for more than an
hour, real communion with the Lord, before breakfast. May he in mercy
continue this state of heart to his most unworthy child!

October 9. I have many times had thoughts of giving in print some
account of the Lord's goodness to me, for the instruction, comfort, and
encouragement of the children of God. I have considered to-day all the
reasons for and against, and find that there are scarcely any against,
and many for it.

November 15. Bristol. Brother C----r and I have been praying together,
the last five days, that the Lord would be pleased to send us means for
carrying on the work of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. This
evening, a brother gave me six shillings and one penny, being money
which he formerly used to pay towards the support of a trade club, which
he has lately given up for the Lord's sake. November 18. This evening
thirty pounds were given to me; twenty-five pounds for the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution, and five pounds for myself. This is a most
remarkable answer to prayer. Brother C----r and I have prayed repeatedly
together during the last week concerning the work, and especially that
the Lord would be pleased to give us the means to continue, and even
enlarge the field. In addition to this, I have several times asked for a
supply for myself, and he has kindly granted both these requests. O that
I may have grace to trust him more and more!




CHAPTER VII.

HOME FOR DESTITUTE ORPHANS.

1835-1836.

    FRANKE'S WORKS FOLLOW HIM--GREAT UNDERTAKING CONCEIVED--REASONS
    FOR ESTABLISHING AN ORPHAN HOUSE--PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE--TREASURE
    LAID UP IN HEAVEN--IN PRAYER AND IN FAITH, THE WORK IS BEGUN.


November 20. This evening I took tea at a sister's house, where I found
Franke's life. I have frequently, for a long time, thought of laboring
in a similar way, on a much smaller scale; not to imitate Franke, but in
reliance upon the Lord. May God make it plain! November 21. To-day I
have had it very much impressed on my heart, no longer merely to _think_
about the establishment of an orphan house, but actually to set about
it, and I have been very much in prayer respecting it, in order to
ascertain the Lord's mind. November 23. To-day I had ten pounds sent
from Ireland, for our Institution. The Lord, in answer to prayer, has
given me, in a few days, about fifty pounds. I had asked only for forty
pounds. This has been a great encouragement to me, and has still more
stirred me up to think and pray about the establishment of an orphan
house. Nov. 25. I have been again much in prayer yesterday and to-day
about the orphan house, and am more and more convinced that it is of
God. May he in mercy guide me!

It may be well to enter somewhat minutely upon the reasons which led me
to establish an orphan house. Through my pastoral labors, through my
correspondence, and through brethren who visited Bristol, I had
constantly cases brought before me, which proved that one of the
especial things which the children of God needed in our day, was, _to
have their faith strengthened_. I might visit a brother who worked
fourteen or even sixteen hours a day at his trade, the necessary result
of which was, that not only his body suffered, but his soul was lean,
and he had no enjoyment in God. I might point out to him that he ought
to work less, in order that his bodily health might not suffer, and that
he might gather strength for his inner man, by reading the word of God,
by meditation over it, and by prayer. The reply, however, I generally
found to be something like this: "But if I work less, I do not earn
enough for the support of my family. Even now, whilst I work so much, I
have scarcely enough." There was no trust in God, no real belief in the
truth of that word, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." I might
reply something like this: "My dear brother, it is not your work which
supports your family, but the Lord; and he who has fed you and your
family when you could not work at all, on account of illness, would
surely provide for you and yours; if, for the sake of obtaining food for
your inner man, you were to work only for so many hours a day as would
allow you proper time for retirement. And is it not the case now that
you begin the work of the day after having had only a few hurried
moments for prayer; and when you leave off your work in the evening, and
mean then to read a little of the word of God, are you not too much worn
out in body and mind to enjoy it, and do you not often fall asleep
whilst reading the Scriptures, or whilst on your knees in prayer?" The
brother would allow it was so; he would allow that my advice was good;
but still I read in his countenance, even if he should not have actually
said so, "How should I get on, if I were to _carry out_ your advice?" I
longed, therefore, to have something to point the brother to, as a
visible proof that our God and Father is the same faithful God that he
ever was,--as willing as ever to PROVE himself the LIVING GOD, in our
day as formerly, _to all who put their trust in him_.

Again, sometimes I found children of God tried in mind by the prospect
of old age, when they might be unable to work any longer, and therefore
were harassed by the fear of having to go into the poorhouse. If in such
a case I pointed out to them how their heavenly Father has always helped
those who put their trust in him, they might not _say_ that times have
changed; but yet it was evident enough that God was not looked upon by
them as the LIVING God. I longed to set something before the children of
God whereby they might see that he does not forsake, even in our day,
those who rely upon him.

Another class of persons were brethren in business, who suffered in
their souls, and brought guilt on their consciences, by carrying on
their business almost in the same way as unconverted persons do. The
competition in trade, the bad times, the over-peopled country, were
given as reasons why, if the business were carried on simply according
to the word of God, it could not be expected to do well. Such a brother,
perhaps, would express the wish that he might be differently situated,
but very rarely did I see _that there was a stand made for God, that
there was the holy determination to trust in the living God, and to
depend on him, in order that a good conscience might be maintained_. To
this class, likewise, I desired to show by a visible proof that God is
unchangeably the same.

Then there was another class of persons, individuals who were in
professions in which they could not continue with a good conscience, or
persons who were in an unscriptural position with reference to spiritual
things; but both classes feared, on account of the consequences, to give
up the profession in which they could not abide with God, or to leave
their position, lest they should be thrown out of employment. My spirit
longed to be instrumental in strengthening their faith, by giving them
not only instances from the word of God of his willingness and ability
to help all those who rely upon him, but _to show them by proofs_ that
he is the same in our day. I well knew _that the word of God ought to be
enough_; but I considered that I ought to lend a helping hand to my
brethren, if by any means, by this visible proof to the unchangeable
faithfulness of the Lord, I might strengthen their hands in God; for I
remembered what a great blessing my own soul had received through the
Lord's dealings with his servant A. H. Franke, who, in dependence upon
the living God alone, established an immense orphan house, which I had
seen many times with my own eyes. I therefore judged myself bound to be
the servant of the church of Christ in the particular point on which I
had obtained mercy; namely, _in being able to take God by his word, and
to rely upon it_.

All these exercises of my soul, which resulted from the fact that so
many believers with whom I became acquainted were harassed and
distressed in mind, or brought guilt on their consciences on account of
not trusting in the Lord, were used by God to awaken in my heart the
desire of setting before the church at large, and before the world, a
proof that he has not in the least changed; and this seemed to me best
done by the establishing of an orphan house. It needed to be something
which could be seen, even by the natural eye. Now, if I, a poor man,
simply by prayer and faith, obtained, _without asking any individual_,
the means for establishing and carrying on an orphan house, there would
be something which, with the Lord's blessing, might be instrumental in
strengthening the faith of the children of God, besides being a
testimony to the consciences of the unconverted of the reality of the
things of God.

This, then, was the primary reason for establishing the orphan house. I
certainly did from my heart desire to be used by God to benefit the
bodies of poor children, bereaved of both parents, and seek in other
respects, with the help of God, to do them good for this life. I also
particularly longed to be used by God in getting the dear orphans
trained up in the fear of God; but still, the first and primary object
of the work was, and still is, that God might be magnified by the fact
that the orphans under my care are provided with all they need, only
_by prayer and faith_, without any one being asked by me or my
fellow-laborers, whereby it may be seen that God is FAITHFUL STILL, and
HEARS PRAYER STILL. That I was not mistaken, has been abundantly proved
since November, 1835, both by the conversion of many sinners who have
read the accounts which have been published in connection with this
work, and also by the abundance of fruit that has followed in the hearts
of the saints, for which, from my inmost soul, I desire to be grateful
to God, and the honor and glory of which not only is due to him alone,
but which I, by his help, am enabled to ascribe to him.

November 28. I have been, every day this week, very much in prayer
concerning the orphan house, chiefly entreating the Lord to take away
every thought concerning it out of my mind if the matter be not of him;
and have also repeatedly examined my heart concerning my motives in the
matter. But I have been more and more confirmed that it is of God.

December 2. I have again these last days prayed much about the orphan
house, and have frequently examined my heart, that if it were at all my
desire to establish it for the sake of gratifying myself I might find it
out. To that end I have also conversed with brother Craik about it, that
he might be instrumental in showing me any hidden corruption of my heart
concerning the matter, or any other scriptural reason against my
engaging in it. The one only reason which ever made me at all doubt as
to its being of God that _I_ should engage in this work, is the
multiplicity of engagements which I have already. But if the matter be
of God, he will in due time send suitable individuals, so that
comparatively little of my time will be taken up in this service.

This morning I asked the Lord especially that he would be pleased to
teach me through the instrumentality of brother C.; and I went to him,
that he might have an opportunity of probing my heart. For as I desire
only the Lord's glory, I should be glad to be instructed through the
instrumentality of any brother, if the matter be not of him. But brother
C., on the contrary, greatly encouraged me in it. Therefore, I have this
day taken the first actual step in the matter, in having ordered bills
to be printed, announcing a public meeting on December 9, at which I
intend to lay before the brethren my thoughts concerning the orphan
house, as a means of ascertaining more clearly the Lord's mind
concerning the matter. December 5. This evening I was struck, in reading
the Scriptures, with these words: "Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill
it." I was led to apply this Scripture to the orphan house, and asked
the Lord for premises, one thousand pounds, and suitable individuals to
take care of the children. December 7. To-day I received the first
shilling for the orphan house.

December 9. This afternoon the first piece of furniture was given,--a
large wardrobe. This afternoon and evening I was low in spirit as it
regards the orphan house, but as soon as I began to speak at the meeting
I received peculiar assistance from God. After the meeting, ten
shillings was given to me. _There was purposely no collection_, nor did
any one speak besides myself; for it was not in the least intended to
work upon the feelings, for I sought to be quite sure concerning the
mind of God. After the meeting, a sister offered herself for the work. I
went home, happy in the Lord, and full of confidence that the matter
will come to pass, though but ten shillings has been given. December 10.
I have sent to the press a statement, which contains the substance of
what I said at the meeting last evening. I have received a letter, in
which a brother and sister wrote thus: "We propose ourselves for the
service of the intended orphan house, if you think us qualified for it;
also to give up all the furniture, etc., which the Lord has given us,
for its use; and to do this without receiving any salary whatever,
believing that if it be the will of the Lord to employ us, he will
supply all our need," etc. In the evening a brother brought, from
several individuals, three dishes, twenty-eight plates, three basins,
one jug, four mugs, three salt-stands, one grater, four knives, and five
forks.

December 12. While I was praying this morning that the Lord would give
us a fresh token of his favor concerning the orphan house, a brother
brought three dishes, twelve plates, one basin, and one blanket. After
this had been given, I thanked God, and asked him to give even this day
another encouragement. Shortly after, fifty pounds was given, and that
by an individual from whom, for several reasons, I could not have
expected this sum. Thus the hand of God appeared so much the more
clearly. Even then I was led to pray that this day the Lord would give
still more. In the evening, accordingly, there was sent, by a sister,
twenty-nine yards of print. Also a sister offered herself for the work.
December 13. A brother was influenced this day to give four shillings
per week, as long as the Lord gives the means: eight shillings was given
by him as two weeks' subscription. To-day a brother and sister offered
themselves, with all their furniture, and all their provisions which
they have in the house, if they can be usefully employed in the concerns
of the orphan house.

December 14. To-day a sister offered her services for the work. In
the evening another sister offered herself for the institution.
December 15. A sister brought, from several friends, ten basins, eight
mugs, one plate, five dessert spoons, six teaspoons, one skimmer, one
toasting-fork, one flour-dredge, three knives and forks, one sheet, one
pillow-case, one table-cloth; also one pound. In the afternoon were sent
fifty-five yards of sheeting, and twelve yards of calico. December 16. I
took out of the box in my room one shilling. December 17. I was rather
cast down last evening and this morning about the matter; questioning
whether I ought to be engaged in this way, and was led to ask the Lord
to give me some further encouragement. Soon after were sent by a brother
two pieces of print, the one seven and the other twenty-three and three
fourths yards, six and three fourths yards of calico, four pieces of
lining, about four yards altogether, a sheet, and a yard measure. This
evening another brother brought a quantity of household articles, and
told me that it had been put into the heart of an individual to send
to-morrow one hundred pounds.

December 18. This afternoon the same brother brought, from a sister, a
counterpane, a flatiron-stand, eight cups and saucers, a sugar-basin, a
milk jug, a teacup, sixteen thimbles, five knives and forks, six
dessert-spoons, twelve teaspoons, four combs, and two little graters;
from another friend a flatiron, and a cup and saucer. At the same time
he brought the hundred pounds above referred to. Since the publication
of the second edition, it has pleased the Lord to take to himself the
donor of this hundred pounds, and I therefore give, in this present
edition, some further account of the donation and the donor.

A. L. was known to me almost from the beginning of my coming to Bristol,
in 1832. She earned her bread by needle-work, by which she gained from
two shillings to five shillings per week; the average, I suppose, was
not more than three shillings sixpence, as she was weak in body. But I
do not remember ever to have heard her utter a word of complaint on
account of earning so little. Some time before I had been led to
establish an orphan house, her father had died, through which event she
had come in possession of four hundred and eighty pounds, which sum had
been left to her (and the same amount to her brother and two sisters) by
her grandmother, but of which her father had had the interest during his
lifetime. The father, who had been much given to drinking, died in debt,
which debts the children wished to pay; but the rest, besides A. L., did
not like to pay in full, and offered to the creditors twenty-five per
cent, which they gladly accepted, as they had not the least legal claim
upon the children. After the debts had been paid according to this
agreement, sister A. L. said to herself, "However sinful my father may
have been, yet he was my father, and as I have the means of paying his
debts to the full amount, I ought, as a believing child, to do so,
seeing that my brother and sisters will not do it." She then went to all
the creditors secretly, and paid the full amount of the debts, which
took forty pounds more of her money, besides her share, which she had
given before: Her brother and two sisters now gave fifty pounds each of
their property to their mother; but A. L. said to herself, "I am a
_child of God_; surely I ought to give my mother twice as much as my
brothers and sisters." She therefore gave her mother one hundred pounds.
Shortly after this she sent me the hundred pounds towards the orphan
house. I was not a little surprised when I received this money from her,
for I had always known her as a poor girl, and I had never heard
anything about her having come into the possession of this money, and
her dress had never given me the least indication of an alteration in
her circumstances. Before, however, accepting this money from her, I had
a long conversation with her, in which I sought to probe her as to her
motives, and in which I sought to ascertain whether, as I had feared,
she might have given this money in the feeling of the moment, without
having counted the cost. But I had not conversed long with this beloved
sister, before I found that she was, in this particular, a quiet, calm,
considerate follower of the Lord Jesus, and one who desired, in spite of
what human reason might say, to act according to the words of our Lord,
"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth." "Sell that ye have,
and give alms." When I remonstrated with her, in order that I might see
whether she had counted the cost, she said to me, "The Lord Jesus has
given his _last_ drop of blood for me, and should I not give him this
hundred pounds?" She would also have me take five pounds for the poor
saints in communion with us. I mention here particularly that this dear
sister kept all these things to herself, and did them as much as
possible in secret; and during her lifetime, I suppose, not six brethren
and sisters among us knew that she had ever possessed four hundred and
eighty pounds, or that she had given one hundred pounds towards the
orphan house.

I relate one instance more. August 4, 1836, seven months and a half
after she had given the hundred pounds, she came one morning to me, and
said: "Last evening I felt myself particularly stirred up to pray about
the funds of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution; but whilst praying, I
thought, _what good is it for me to pray for means, if I do not give
when I have the means_, and I have therefore brought you this five
pounds." As I had reason to believe that, by this time, by far the
greater part of her money was gone, I again had a good deal of
conversation with her, to see whether she really did count the cost, and
whether this donation also was given unto the Lord, or from momentary
excitement, in which case it was better not to give the money. However,
she was at this time also steadfast, grounded upon the word of God; and
evidently constrained by the love of Christ; and all the effect my
conversation had upon her was, that she said, "You must take five
shillings in addition to the five pounds, as a proof that I give the
five pounds cheerfully." And thus she constrained me to take the five
pounds and five shillings.--Four things are especially to be noticed
about this beloved sister, with reference to all this period of her
earthly pilgrimage: 1. She did all these things in secret, avoiding to
the utmost all show about them, and thus proved that she did not desire
the praise of man. 2. She remained, as before, of an humble and lowly
mind, and she proved thus that she had done what she did unto the Lord,
and not unto man. 3. Her dress remained, during all the time that she
had this comparative abundance, the same as before. It was clean, yet as
simple and as inexpensive as it was at the time when all her income
consisted of three shillings and sixpence, or at most five shillings per
week. There was not the least difference as to her lodging, dress,
manner of life, etc. She remained in every way the poor handmaid of the
Lord, as to all outward appearance. 4. But that which is as lovely as
the rest, she continued working at her needle all this time. She earned
her two shillings-sixpence, or three shillings, or a little more, a
week, by her work, as before; whilst she gave away the money in
sovereigns or five-pound notes. At last all her money was gone, and that
some years before she fell asleep; and as her bodily health never had
been good as long as I had known her, and was now much worse, she found
herself peculiarly dependent upon the Lord, who never forsook her, up to
the last moments of her earthly course. Her body became weaker and
weaker, in consequence of which she was able to work very little, for
many months before she died; but the Lord supplied her with all she
needed, though she never asked for anything. For instance, a sister in
communion With us sent her, for many months, all the bread she used. Her
mouth was full of thanksgiving, even in the midst of the greatest bodily
sufferings.

December 20. A sister gave five pounds. December 21. A friend sent one
pound. Weekly subscription of four shillings. December 22. A sister gave
me one pound, and a friend sent two shillings and sixpence. December 23.
A brother gave, this evening, a piece of blind line and a dozen of blind
tassels. About ten in the evening, a gentleman brought me from an
individual, whose name he was not to mention, four pounds, of which I
was allowed to take two pounds for the orphan house, and to give the
other two pounds to poor believers. December 31. This evening we had a
special meeting for prayer and praise. There have been received into the
church, during the past year, 59. There are men in communion with us,
95. I have received for my temporal wants, in freewill offerings,
presents, etc., £285 1s. 1¼d.

    During January to May of 1836, numerous donations were made of
    furniture, provisions, half-worn clothing, and money (varying
    from one hundred pounds to a halfpenny). Encouraged by these
    _unsolicited_ offerings, Mr. Müller determined to open the
    Orphan House.

April, 21. This day was set apart for prayer and thanksgiving concerning
the Orphan House, as it is now opened. In the morning, several brethren
prayed, and brother Craik spoke on the last verses of Psalm xx. In the
afternoon, I addressed our day and Sunday school children, the orphans,
and other children present. In the evening we had another prayer
meeting. There are now seventeen children in the Orphan House.

May 6. I have now been for some years, and especially these last few
months, more or less thinking and praying respecting publishing a short
account of the Lord's dealings with me. To-day I have at last settled to
do so, and have begun to write.

May 16. For these several weeks our income has been little; and though I
had prayed many times that the Lord would enable us to put by the taxes,
yet the prayer remained unanswered. In the midst of it all, my comfort
was, that the Lord would send help by the time it would be needed. One
thing particularly has been a trial to us of late, far more than our own
temporal circumstances, which is, that we have scarcely, in any measure,
been able to relieve the distress among the poor saints. To-day, the
Lord, at last, after I had many times prayed to him for these weeks
past, answered my prayers, there being seven pounds twelve shillings and
one farthing given to me as my part of the freewill offerings through
the boxes,--two five-pound notes having been put in yesterday, one for
brother Craik and one for me. Thus the Lord has again delivered us, and
answered our prayers, and that _not one single hour too late_; for the
taxes have not as yet been called for. May he fill my heart with
gratitude for this fresh deliverance, and may he be pleased to enable me
more and more to trust in him, and to wait patiently for his help?




CHAPTER VIII.

THE FIELD WIDENING.

1836-1837.

    AN UNEXPECTED OBSTACLE--IMPLICIT SUBMISSION--A SECOND ORPHAN
    HOUSE PROPOSED--AN ENCOURAGING TEXT--THE NEW ORPHAN HOUSE
    OPENED--COMPLETED ANSWER TO PRAYER--PROGRESS OF THE LORD'S
    WORK--THE OVERSIGHT OF THE FLOCK.


    Under date of May 18, 1836, Mr. M.  says:--

In the foregoing pages, a statement has been given of the success with
which the Lord has been pleased to crown the prayers of his servant
respecting the establishment of an Orphan House in this city. The
subject of my prayer was, that he would graciously provide a house,
either as a loan or as a gift, or that some one might be led to pay the
rent for one; further, that he would give me one thousand pounds for the
object, and likewise suitable individuals to take care of the children.
A day or two after, I was led to ask, in addition to the above, that he
would put it into the hearts of his people to send me articles of
furniture, and some clothes for the children. In answer to these
petitions, many articles of furniture, clothing, and food were sent, a
conditional offer of a house, as a gift, was made, individuals proposed
themselves to take care of the children, and various sums of money were
given, varying from one hundred pounds to a halfpenny.

It may be well to state that the above results have followed in answer
to prayer, without any one having been asked by me for one single thing;
from which I have refrained, not on account of want of confidence in the
brethren, or because I doubted their love to the Lord, but that I might
see the hand of God so much the more clearly.

So far as I remember, I brought even the most minute circumstances
concerning the Orphan House before the Lord in my petitions, being
conscious of my own weakness and ignorance. There was, however, one
point I never had prayed about, namely, that the Lord would send
children; for I naturally took it for granted that there would be plenty
of applications. The appointed time came, and not even one application
was made. This circumstance now led me to lie low before my God in
prayer, and to examine my heart once more as to all the motives
concerning it; and being able, as formerly, to say, that his glory was
my chief aim, _i. e._ that it might be seen that it is not a vain thing
to trust in the living God, and still continuing in prayer, I was at
last brought to this state, that I could say _from my heart_ that I
should rejoice in God being glorified in this matter, though it were _by
bringing the whole to nothing_. But as still, after all, it seemed to me
more tending to the glory of God to establish and prosper the Orphan
House, I could then ask him heartily to send applications. I enjoyed now
a peaceful state of heart concerning the subject, and was also more
assured than ever that God would establish it. _The very next day_ the
first application was made, and within a short time forty-three applied.
I rented the house No. 6, Wilson Street, as being, on account of its
cheapness and largeness, very suitable.

I have mentioned that we intended to take in the children from the
seventh to the twelfth year. But after six applications had been made
for children between four and six years of age, it became a subject of
solemn and prayerful consideration, whether, as long as there were
vacancies, such children should not be received, though so young. I came
at last to the conclusion to take in the little girls under seven years
of age, for whom application had been made. Further, it has been
repeatedly brought before me, how desirable it would be to establish
also, in this city, an Orphan House for _male_ children, and there were
even articles sent for _little orphan boys_. Partly, then, on account of
these reasons; and partly because the Institution already opened was
quite filled in a few days; and partly because the Lord has done
hitherto far above what I could have expected; I have at last, after
repeated prayer, come to the conclusion, in the name of the Lord, and in
dependence upon him alone for support, to propose the establishment of
an Infant Orphan House.

June 3. From May 16 up to this day I have been confined to the house,
and a part of the time to my bed, on account of a local inflammation,
which keeps me from walking. Almost every day during this time I have
been able to continue writing a narrative of the Lord's dealings with
me, which had been again laid aside after May 7, on account of a number
of pressing engagements. It is very remarkable that the greatest
objection against writing it for the press was want of time. Now,
through this affliction, which leaves my mind free, and gives me time,
on account of confinement to the house, I have been able to write about
a hundred quarto pages.

June 14. This morning brother C----r and I prayed unitedly, chiefly
about the schools and the circulation of the Scriptures. Besides asking
for blessings upon the work, we have also asked the Lord for the means
which are needed; for on July 1, seventeen pounds ten shillings will be
due for the rent of school-rooms, and, besides this, we want at least
forty pounds more to go on with the circulation of the Scriptures, to
pay the salaries of the masters, etc. Towards all this we have only
about seven pounds. I also prayed for the remainder of the thousand
pounds for the Orphan House.

June 21. This evening brother C----r and I found that the Lord has not
only been pleased to send us, through the offerings which have come in
during the last week, in answer to our prayers, the seventeen pounds ten
shillings which will be due for the rent of two school-rooms on July 1,
but that we have five pounds more than is needed. Thus the Lord once
more has answered our prayers.

July 28. For some weeks past we have not been able to pay the salary of
the masters and governesses _a month in advance_, but have been obliged
to pay it _weekly_. Brother C----r and I have lately prayed repeatedly
together respecting the funds, but we were now brought so low, that we
should not have been able to pay even this _weekly_ salary of the
teachers, had not the Lord most remarkably helped us again to-day. For,
besides one pound, which was given to us, this evening a brother gave
eight pounds, which sum had been made up by a number of his workmen
_paying weekly one penny each_, of their own accord, towards our funds.
The money had been collecting for many months, and, in this our
necessity, it had been put into the heart of this brother to bring it.

July 29. This evening, from six to half past nine, we had a meeting for
inquirers. There came twelve fresh cases before us.

October 1. To-day, in dependence upon the Lord alone for means, we
engaged a brother as a master for a sixth day school. On account of the
many deliverances which we have had of late, we have not hesitated to
enlarge the field, as another boys' school was greatly needed.

October 5. This evening twenty-five pounds was given to me for the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution. Thus the Lord has already given the
means of defraying the expenses of the new boys' school for some months
to come.

October 19. To-day, after having many times prayed respecting the
matter, I have at last engaged a sister as matron for the Infant Orphan
House, never having been able, up to this day, to meet with an
individual who seemed suitable, though there has been money enough in
hand, for some time past, for commencing this work, and there have been
applications made for several infant orphans.

October 25. To-day we obtained, without any trouble, through the kind
hand of God, very suitable premises for the Infant Orphan House.

November 5. There was given by a brother one hundred pounds, fifty
pounds of which was previously promised, to insure the rent for
premises. It is a remarkable fact, concerning this donation, that I had,
in December of last year, repeatedly asked the Lord to incline the heart
of this brother to give this hundred pounds, and I made a memorandum of
this prayer in my journal of December 12, 1835. On January 25, 1836,
fifty pounds was promised by him, and on November 5, fifty pounds
besides that sum was given; but it was not till some days after, that I
remembered that the very sum for which I had asked the Lord had been
given. When it came to my mind that this prayer had been noted down in
my journal, and I showed it to the donor, we rejoiced together; _he_, to
have been the instrument in giving, and _I_ to have had the request
granted.

November 30. On account of many pressing engagements, I had not been
led, for some time past, to pray respecting the funds. But _being in
great need_, I was led, yesterday morning, earnestly to ask the Lord;
and in answer to this petition a brother gave me, last evening, ten
pounds. He had had it in his heart, for several months past, to give
this sum, but had been hitherto kept from it, not having the means.
Just now, in this our great necessity, the Lord furnished him with the
means, and we were helped in this way. In addition to this ten pounds, I
received last evening a letter with five pounds, from a sister whom I
never saw, and who has been several times used by God as an instrument
to supply our wants. She writes thus: "It has been so much on my mind
lately to send you some money, that I feel as if there must be some
need, which the Lord purposes to honor me by making me the instrument of
supplying. I therefore enclose you five pounds, all I have in the house
at this moment."

December 9. One pound, with Mark ix. 36-7: "And taking a little child,
he set him in the midst of them," etc., a most encouraging passage for
this work, the force of which I had never felt before.

December 15. This day was set apart for prayer and thanksgiving
respecting the Infant Orphan House, which was opened on November 28. In
the morning we had a prayer meeting. In the afternoon, besides prayer
and thanksgiving, I addressed the children of our day schools and the
orphans, about 350, on Ecclesiastes xii. 1.

    In addition to the items mentioned above, donations were
    received during the year, of money, food, clothes, books, boxes,
    coal-hods, ornaments (to be sold), etc.; also, the offer of
    gratuitous medical attendance, and medicine. Up to the close of
    1836, seven hundred and seventy pounds and ninepence halfpenny
    had been given, and forty pounds promised.

December 31. We had this evening a prayer meeting to praise the Lord for
his goodness during the past year, and to ask him for a continuance of
his favors.

During the past year there have been received into the church, 52; and
the Lord has been pleased to give me, as it regards my temporal
supplies, £232 11s. 9d.

January 2, 1837. This evening the two churches had again an especial
prayer meeting.

January 5. To-day a sister called and told me about the conversion of
her father, who, in his eightieth year, after having for many years
lived openly in sin, is at last brought to the knowledge of the Lord.
This sister had long prayed for the conversion of her father, and at
last, though only after twenty years, the Lord gave her the desire of
her heart.

May 18. There are now sixty-four children in the two Orphan Houses, and
two more are expected, which will fill the two houses.

May 28. The narrative of some of the Lord's dealings with me is now near
being published, which has led me again most earnestly this day week,
and repeatedly since, to ask the Lord that he would be pleased to give
me what is wanting of the one thousand pounds, for which sum I have
asked him on behalf of the orphans; for though, in my own mind, the
thing is as good as done, so much so that I have repeatedly been able to
thank God that he will surely give me every shilling of that sum, yet to
others this would not be enough. As the whole matter, then, about the
Orphan House had been commenced for the glory of God, that in this way
before the world and the church there might be another visible proof
that the Lord delights in answering prayer; and as there was yet a part
of the thousand pounds wanting; and _as I earnestly desired the book
might not leave the press_ before every shilling of that sum had been
given in answer to prayer, _without one single individual having been
asked by me for anything_, that thus I might have the sweet privilege of
bearing my testimony for God in this book;--for these reasons, I say, I
have given myself earnestly to prayer about this matter since May 21. On
May 22 came in seven pounds and ten shillings, and on May 23, three
pounds. On May 24, a lady, whom I never saw before, called on me, and
gave me forty pounds. This circumstance has greatly encouraged me; for
the Lord showed me thereby, afresh, his willingness to continue to send
us _large sums_, and that they can even come from individuals whom we
have never seen before. On May 25, three pounds and six shillings were
sent, from two unexpected quarters. On May 27 was sent, anonymously, a
parcel of worn clothes, from London, and a sovereign. To-day (May 28) I
received again four pounds three shillings and sixpence; and also a
parcel was sent from a considerable distance, containing seven pairs of
socks, and the following trinkets, to be sold for the support of the
orphans: one gold pin with an Irish pearl, fifteen Irish pearls, two
pins, two brooches, two lockets, one seal, two studs, eleven rings, one
chain, and one bracelet, all of gold.

June 15. To-day I gave myself once more earnestly to prayer respecting
the remainder of the thousand pounds. This evening five pounds were
given, so that now the whole sum is made up. During eighteen months and
ten days this petition has been brought before God almost daily. From
the moment I asked till the Lord granted it fully, I had never been
allowed to doubt that he would give every shilling of that sum. Often
have I praised him beforehand, in the assurance that he would grant my
request. The thing after which we have especially to seek in prayer is,
that we believe that we receive, according to Mark xi. 24: "_What things
soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them._"

As the Lord has so greatly condescended to listen to my prayers, and as
I consider it one of the particular talents which he has intrusted to me
to exercise faith upon his promises, as it regards my own temporal
wants and those of others; and as an Orphan House for _boys_ above seven
years of age seems greatly needed in this city; and as also without it
we know not how to provide for the little _boys_ in the Infant Orphan
House, when they are above seven years of age, I purpose to establish an
Orphan House for about forty boys above seven years of age.

July 12. The same friend who gave me on May 24, 1837, forty pounds for
the orphans, and whom, up to that time, I had never seen, gave four
hundred and sixty pounds more, being altogether five hundred pounds.

It is now three years and four months since brother Craik and I began,
in dependence upon the Lord for funds, to seek to help the spread of the
gospel through the instrumentality of schools, the circulation of the
Holy Scriptures, and by aiding missionary exertions. Since then there
have been circulated, through our instrumentality, 4,030 copies of the
Scriptures; four day schools, for poor children, have been _established_
by us; 1,119 children have been instructed in the six day schools, and
353 children are now in those six day schools. Besides this, a Sunday
school and an adult school have been supplied with all they needed, and
missionary exertions in the East Indies, in Upper Canada, and on the
continent of Europe, have been aided. In addition to this, the word of
God has been preached from house to house among the poor, in connection
with the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, by brother C----r, within the
last two years.

    On the 15th of August, 1837, the preceding portion of this
    narrative was published.

Aug. 17. To-day two more children were received into the Infant Orphan
House, which makes up our full number, sixty-six in the Girls' and
Infant Orphan Houses.

September 2. I have been looking about for a house for the orphan boys,
these last three days. Everything else has been provided. The Lord has
given suitable individuals to take care of the children, money, etc. In
his own time he will give a house also.

September 19. It was to-day particularly impressed upon my heart that I
ought to seek for more retirement, though the work should _apparently_
suffer ever so much; and that arrangements should be made whereby I may
be able to visit the brethren more, as an _unvisited_ church will sooner
or later become an _unhealthy church_. Pastors, as fellow-laborers, are
greatly needed among us.

September 28. I have for a long time been too much outwardly engaged.
Yesterday morning I spent about three hours in the vestry of Gideon, to
be able to have more time for retirement. I meant to do the same in the
afternoon, but before I could leave the house I was called on, and thus
one person after the other came, till I had to go out. Thus it has been
again to-day.

October 16. For a long time past brother Craik and I have felt the
importance of more pastoral visiting, and it has been _one of our
greatest trials_ that we have been unable to give more time to it. This
evening we had purposely a meeting of the two churches, at which brother
Craik and I, and a brother from Devonshire, spoke on: I. The importance
of pastoral visiting. II. The particular obstacles which hindered us in
attending to it. III. The question whether there was any way of removing
some of the obstacles.

I. As to the importance of pastoral visiting, the following points were
mentioned: 1. Watching over the saints, by means of visiting them, to
prevent coldness, or to recover them from backsliding. 2. To counsel and
advise them in family affairs, in their business, and in spiritual
matters. 3. To keep up that loving and familiar intercourse which is so
desirable between saints and those who have the oversight of them. These
visits should be, if possible, frequent; but in our case there have been
several obstacles in the way.

II. The particular obstacles in our case are: 1. The largeness of the
number who are in communion with us. One hundred would be quite as many
as we have strength to visit regularly, and as often as would be
desirable; but there are nearly four hundred in fellowship with us. 2.
The distance of the houses of the saints from our own dwellings, as many
live more than two miles off. 3. The Lord's blessing upon our labors.
Not one year has passed away, since we have been in Bristol, without
more than fifty having been added to our number, each of whom, in
general, needed several times to be conversed with before being admitted
into fellowship. 4. That brother Craik and I have each of us the care of
two churches. At the first sight it appears as if the work is thus
divided, but the double number of meetings, etc., nearly double the
work. 5. The mere ruling, and taking care, in general, of a large body
of believers, irrespective of the other work, takes much more time, and
requires much more strength, than the taking care of a small body of
believers, as we, by grace, desire not to allow known sin among us. 6.
The position which we have in the church at large brings many brethren
to us who travel through Bristol, who call on us, or lodge with us, and
to whom, according to the Lord's will, we have to give some time. 7. In
my own case, an extensive needful correspondence. 8. The weakness of
body on the part of both of us. When the preaching is done,--when
strangers who lodge with us are gone,--when the calls at our house are
over,--when the needful letters, however briefly, are written,--when the
necessary church business is settled,--our minds are often so worn out
that we are glad to be quiet. 9. But suppose we have bodily strength
remaining, after the above things have been attended to, yet the frame
of mind is not always so as that one could visit. After having been
particularly tried by church matters, which in so large a body does not
rarely occur, or being cast down in one's own soul, one may be fit for
the closet, but not for visiting the saints. 10. Lastly, in my own case,
no small part of my time is taken up by attending to the affairs of the
Orphan Houses, schools, the circulation of the Scriptures, the aiding
missionary efforts, and other work connected with the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution.

III. What is to be done under these circumstances? 1. In the days of the
apostles there would have been more brethren to take the oversight of so
large a body as we are. The Lord has not laid upon us a burden which is
too heavy for us; he is not a hard master. It is evident that he does
not mean us _even to attempt to visit all the saints_ as much as is
evidently needful, and much less as frequently as it would be desirable.
We mention this, to prevent uncomfortable feelings on the part of the
dear saints under our pastoral care, who find themselves not as much
visited as they used to be when we came to Bristol, when the number of
them was not seventy, and now it is about four hundred, and when in many
other respects the work in our hands was not half so much as it is now,
and when we had much more bodily strength. 2. It is therefore evident
that there are other pastors needed; not nominal pastors, but such as
the Lord has called, to whom he has given a pastor's heart and pastoral
gifts. 3. Such may be raised up by the Lord from our own number, or the
Lord may send them from elsewhere. 4. But in the mean time we should at
least see whether there are not helpers among us. 5. As to the work
itself, in order that time may be saved, it appears desirable that the
two churches, Bethesda and Gideon, should be united into one, that the
breaking of bread should be alternately, and that the number of weekly
meetings should be reduced.

October 21. To-day the Lord has given me a house for the Orphan Boys, in
the same street in which the other two Orphan Houses are.

    Mr. Müller's health having suffered from his cares, money was
    sent him from unexpected sources, to be used in travelling and
    recreation.


REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1837.

1. There are now eighty-one children in the three Orphan Houses, and
nine brethren and sisters, who have the care of them. Ninety, therefore,
daily sit down to table. Lord, look on the necessities of thy servant!

2. The schools require as much help as before; nay, more, particularly
the Sunday school, in which there are at present about 320 children, and
in the day schools about 350. Lord, thy servant is a poor man; but he
has trusted in thee, and made his boast in thee, before the sons of men;
therefore let him not be confounded! Let it not be said all this was
enthusiasm, and therefore it is come to naught!

3. My temporal supplies have been £307 2s. 6½d.




CHAPTER IX.

TRIAL.

1838.

    THE MINISTRY OF SICKNESS--PEACE OF MIND--JESUS A PRESENT
    HELP--DEEP POVERTY--PLEADING WITH GOD--UNITED PRAYER.


January 6, 1838. I feel little better in my head, though my general
health seems improved; but my kind physician says I am much better, and
advises me now change of air. This evening a sister, who resides about
fifty miles from hence, and who is quite unacquainted with the medical
advice given to me this morning, sent me fifteen pounds for the express
purpose of change of air; and wrote that she felt assured, from having
been similarly afflicted, that nothing would do me so much good, humanly
speaking, as quiet and change of air.

January 7. This is the ninth Lord's day that I have been kept from
ministering in the word. My affliction is connected with a great
tendency to irritability of temper; yea, with some satanic feeling,
foreign to me even naturally.

January 10. To-day I went with my family to Trowbridge. Jan. 14. Lord's
day. I have spent several hours in prayer to-day, and read on my knees,
and prayed for two hours over Psalm lxiii. God has blessed my soul much
to-day. My soul is now brought into that state that I delight myself in
the will of God, as it regards my health. Yea, I can now say, _from my
heart_, I would not have this disease removed till God, by its means,
has bestowed the blessing for which it was sent.

January 15. I have had, since yesterday afternoon, less suffering in my
head than for the last eight days; though it is even now far from being
well. I have still an inward assurance, on account of the spiritual
blessings which the Lord has granted to me, that through this affliction
he is only purifying me for his blessed service, and that I shall be
soon restored to the work. To-day, also, God has continued to me
fervency of spirit, which I have now enjoyed for three days following.
He has to-day, also, drawn out my soul into much real communion with
himself, and into holy desires to be more conformed to his dear Son.
When God gives a spirit of prayer, how easy then to pray! Nevertheless,
it was given to me in the use of the means, as I fell on my knees last
Saturday, to read his word with meditation, and to turn it into prayer.
To-day I spent about three hours in prayer over Psalms lxiv. and lxv. In
reference to that precious word, "O thou that hearest prayer," (Ps. lxv.
2,) I asked the Lord the following petitions, and entreated him to
record them in heaven, and to answer them.

1. That he would give me grace to glorify him by a submissive and
patient spirit under my affliction.

2. That as I was enabled now, and _only now from my heart_, to praise
God for this affliction, he would not remove his hand from me until he
had qualified me for his work more than I have been hitherto.

3. That he would be pleased to grant that the work of conversion,
through the instrumentality of brother Craik and myself, might not
cease, but go on as much now as when we first came to Bristol, yea, more
abundantly than even then.

4. That he would be pleased to give more real spiritual prosperity to
the church under our care than ever we have as yet enjoyed.

5. Having praised him for the sale of so many copies of my Narrative in
so short a time, I entreated him to cause every copy to be disposed of.

6. I asked him to continue to let his rich blessing rest upon this
little work, and more abundantly, so that many may be converted through
it, and many of the children of God truly benefited by it, and that thus
I might now be speaking through it, though laid aside from active
service.

7. I asked him for his blessing, in the way of conversion, to rest upon
the orphans, and upon the Sunday and day-school children under our care.

8. I asked him for means to carry on these Institutions, and to enlarge
them.

These are some of the petitions which I have asked of my God this
evening, in connection with this his own word. I believe _he has heard
me_. I believe he will make it manifest in his own good time that _he
has heard_ me, and I have recorded these my petitions, this 15th day of
January, 1838, that when God has answered them he may get, through this,
glory to his name. [Whilst writing this second part, I add to the praise
of the Lord, and for the encouragement of the children of God, that
petitions 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, have been _fully_ answered, and the other
petitions, likewise, in part.]

January 16. Tuesday. A blessed day. How very good is the Lord! Fervency
of spirit, through his grace, is continued to me; though this morning,
but for the help of God, I should have lost it again. The weather has
been very cold for several days; but to-day I suffered much, either
because it was colder than before, or because I felt it more, owing to
the weakness of my body, and having taken so much medicine. I arose from
my knees and stirred the fire, but I still remained very cold. I was a
little irritated by this. I moved to another part of the room, but felt
the cold still more. At last, having prayed for some time, I was obliged
to rise up and take a walk to promote circulation. I now entreated the
Lord on my walk that this circumstance might not be permitted to rob me
of the precious communion which I have had with him the last three days;
for this was the object at which Satan aimed. I confessed also my sin of
irritability on account of the cold, and sought to have my conscience
cleansed through the blood of Jesus. He had mercy upon me, my peace was
restored, and when I returned I sought the Lord again in prayer, and had
uninterrupted communion with him.

    His health remaining feeble, Mr. M. left England on April 6, for
    Germany, and returned to Bristol May 7. He continues his  narrative:--

May 8. This evening I went to the prayer meeting at Gideon. I read Psalm
ciii., and was able to thank the Lord publicly for my late affliction.
This is the first time that I have taken any part in the public meetings
of the brethren since November 6, 1837.

July 12. The funds, which were this day twelvemonth about seven hundred
and eighty pounds, are now reduced to about twenty pounds; but, thanks
be to the Lord, my faith is as strong, or stronger, than it was when we
had the larger sum in hand; nor has he at any time, from the
commencement of the work, allowed me to distrust him. Nevertheless, as
our Lord will be inquired of, and as real faith is manifested as such by
leading to prayer, I gave myself to prayer with brother T----, of the
Boys' Orphan House, who had called on me, and who, besides my wife and
brother Craik, is the only individual to whom I speak about the state
of the funds. While we were praying, an orphan child from Frome was
brought, and some believers at Frome, having collected among them five
pounds, sent this money with the child. Thus we received the first
answer at a time of need. _We have given notice for seven children to
come in, and purpose to give notice for five more, though our funds are
so low, hoping that God will look on our necessities._

July 17 and 18. These two days we have had two especial prayer meetings,
from six to nine in the evening, to commend publicly to the Lord the
Boys' Orphan House. Our funds are how very low. There are about twenty
pounds in hand, and in a few days thirty pounds, at least, will be
needed; but I _purposely_ avoided saying anything about our present
necessities, and spoke only to the praise of God, about the abundance
with which our gracious Father, "the Father of the fatherless," has
hitherto supplied us. This was done in order that the hand of God, in
sending help, may be so much the more clearly seen.

July 22. This evening I was walking in our little garden, meditating on
Heb. xiii. 8, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to-day, and
forever." Whilst meditating on his unchangeable love, power, wisdom,
etc., and turning all, as I went on, into prayer respecting myself; and
whilst applying likewise his unchangeable love, and power, and wisdom,
etc., both to my present spiritual and temporal circumstances,--all at
once the present need of the Orphan Houses was brought to my mind.
Immediately I was led to say to myself, Jesus in his love and power has
hitherto supplied me with what I have needed for the orphans, and in the
same unchangeable love and power he will provide me with what I may need
for the future. A flow of joy came into my soul whilst realizing thus
the unchangeableness of our adorable Lord. About one minute after, a
letter was brought me, enclosing a bill for twenty pounds.

August 18. I have not one penny in hand for the orphans. In a day or two
again many pounds will be needed. My eyes are up to the Lord. _Evening._
Before this day is over, I have received from a sister five pounds. She
had some time since put away her trinkets, to be sold for the benefit of
the orphans. This morning, whilst in prayer, it came to her mind, "I
have this five pounds, and owe no man anything, therefore it would be
better to give this money at once, as it may be some time before I can
dispose of the trinkets." She therefore brought it, little knowing that
there was not a penny in hand.

August 29. To-day sixteen believers were baptized. Among those who were
baptized was an aged brother of above eighty-four years, and one above
seventy. For the latter, his believing wife had prayed thirty-eight
years, and at last the Lord answered her prayers in his conversion.

August 31. I have been waiting on the Lord for means, as the matron's
books from the Girls' Orphan House have been brought, and there is no
money in hand to advance for housekeeping. But, as yet, the Lord has not
been pleased to send help. As the matron called to-day for money, one of
the laborers gave two pounds of his own, for the present necessities.

September 1. The Lord in his wisdom and love has not yet sent help.
Whence it is to come, need not be my care. But _I believe_ God will, in
due time, send help. His hour is not yet come. As there was money needed
in the Boys' Orphan House also, the same brother just alluded to gave
two pounds for that also. Thus we were delivered at this time likewise.
But now his means are gone. This is the most trying hour that as yet I
have had in the work, as it regards means; but I know that I shall yet
praise the Lord for his help.

September 5. Our hour of trial continues still. The Lord mercifully has
given enough to supply our daily necessities; but he gives _by the day_
now, and almost _by the hour_, as we need it. Nothing came in yesterday.
I have besought the Lord again and again, both yesterday and to-day. It
is as if the Lord said: "Mine hour is not yet come." But I have faith in
God. I believe that he surely will send help, though I know not whence
it is to come. Many pounds are needed within a few days, and there is
not a penny in hand. This morning two pounds was given for the present
necessities, by one of the laborers in the work. _Evening._ This very
day the Lord sent again some help to encourage me to continue to wait on
him, and to trust in him. As I was praying this afternoon respecting the
matter, I felt fully assured that the Lord would send help, and praised
him beforehand for his help, and asked him to encourage our hearts
through it. I have been also led, yesterday and to-day, to ask the Lord
especially that he would not allow my faith to fail. A few minutes after
I had prayed, brother T---- came and brought four pounds one shilling
and fivepence, which had come in in several small donations. He told me,
at the same time, that to-morrow the books will be brought from the
Infant Orphan House, when money must be advanced for housekeeping. I
thought for a moment it might be well to keep three pounds of this money
for that purpose. But it occurred to me immediately, "_Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof._" The Lord can provide by to-morrow much
more than I need; and I therefore sent three pounds to one of the
sisters whose quarterly salary was due, and the remaining one pound one
shilling and fivepence to the Boys' Orphan House for housekeeping. Thus
I am still penniless. My hope is in God; he will provide.

September 6. This morning the books were brought from the Infant Orphan
House, and the matron sent to ask when she should fetch them, implying
when they would have been looked over, and when money would be advanced
for housekeeping. I said, "to-morrow," though I had not a single penny
in hand. About an hour after, brother T---- sent me a note, to say that
he had received one pound this morning, and that last evening a brother
had sent twenty-nine pounds of salt, forty-four dozen of onions, and
twenty-six pounds of groats.[16]

  [Footnote 16: Groats. Oats or other grain, with the hulls
  removed.--ED.]

September 7. The time had come that I had to send money to the Infant
Orphan House, but the Lord had not sent any more. I gave, therefore, the
pound which had come in yesterday, and two shillings and twopence which
had been put into the box in my house, trusting to the good Lord to send
in more.

September 8. It has not pleased my gracious Lord to send me help as yet.
Yesterday and to-day I have been pleading with God eleven arguments why
he would be graciously pleased to send help. The arguments which I plead
with God are:--

1. That I set about the work for the glory of God, _i. e._ that there
might be a visible proof, by God supplying, _in answer to prayer only_,
the necessities of the orphans, that he is the _living_ God, and most
willing, even in _our_ day, to answer prayer; and that, therefore, he
would be pleased to send supplies.

2. That God is the "Father of the fatherless," and that he, therefore,
as their father, would be pleased to provide. Psalm lxviii. 5.

3. That I have received the children in the name of Jesus, and that
therefore he, in these children, has been received, and is fed, and is
clothed; and that therefore he would be pleased to consider this. Mark
ix. 36, 37.

4. That the faith of many of the children of God has been strengthened
by this work hitherto, and that, if God were to withhold the means for
the future, those who are weak in faith would be staggered; whilst, by a
continuance of means, their faith might still further be strengthened.

5. That many enemies would laugh, were the Lord to withhold supplies,
and say, Did we not foretell that this enthusiasm would come to nothing?

6. That many of the children of God, who are uninstructed, or in a
carnal state, would feel themselves _justified_ to continue their
alliance with the world in the work of God, and to go on as heretofore
in their unscriptural proceedings respecting similar institutions, so
far as the obtaining of means is concerned, if he were not to help me.

7. That the Lord would remember that I am his child, and that he would
graciously pity me, and remember that _I_ cannot provide for these
children, and that therefore he would not allow this burden to lie upon
me long without sending help.

8. That he would remember likewise my fellow-laborers in the work, who
trust in him, but who would be tried were he to withhold supplies.

9. That he would remember that I should have to dismiss the children
from under our scriptural instruction to their former companions.

10. That he would show that those were mistaken who said, that, _at the
first_, supplies might be expected, while the thing was new, but not
afterwards.

11. That I should not know, were he to withhold means, what construction
I should put upon all the many most remarkable answers to prayer which
he had given me heretofore in connection with this work, and which most
fully have shown to me that it is of God.

In some small measure I now understand, experimentally, the meaning of
that word, "_how long_," which so frequently occurs in the prayers of
the Psalms. But even now, by the grace of God, my eyes are up unto him
only, and I believe that he will send help.

Sept. 10. Monday morning. Neither Saturday nor yesterday had any money
come in. It appeared to me now needful to take some steps on account of
our need, _i. e._ to go to the Orphan Houses, call the brethren and
sisters together (who, except brother T----, had never been informed
about the state of the funds), state the case to them, see how much
money was needed for the present, tell them that amidst all this trial
of faith I still believed that God would help, and to pray with them.
Especially, also, I meant to go for the sake of telling them that no
more articles must be purchased than we have the means to pay for, but
to let there be nothing lacking in any way to the children, as it
regards nourishing food and needful clothing; for I would rather at once
send them away than that they should lack. I meant to go for the sake
also of seeing whether there were still articles remaining which had
been sent for the purpose of being sold, or whether there were any
articles really needless, that we might turn them into money. I felt
that the matter was now come to a solemn crisis. About half-past nine
sixpence came in, which had been put anonymously into the box at Gideon
Chapel. This money seemed to me like an earnest that God would have
compassion and send more. About ten, after I had returned from brother
Craik, to whom I had unbosomed my heart again, whilst once more in
prayer for help, a sister called who gave two sovereigns to my wife for
the orphans, stating that she had felt herself stirred up to come, and
that she had delayed coming already too long. A few minutes after, when
I went into the room where she was, she gave me two sovereigns more, and
all this without knowing the least about our need. Thus the Lord most
mercifully has sent us a little help, to the great encouragement of my
faith. A few minutes after I was called on for money from the Infant
Orphan House, to which I sent two pounds, and one pound sixpence to the
Boys' Orphan House, and one pound to the Girls' Orphan House.

To-day I saw a young brother who, as well as one of his sisters, has
been brought to the knowledge of the Lord through my Narrative.

Sept. 11. The good Lord, in his wisdom, still sees it needful to keep us
very low. But this afternoon brother T---- called, and told me that one
of our fellow-laborers had sold his metal watch, and two gold pins, for
one pound one shilling, that nine shillings sixpence had come in, and
that two of our fellow-laborers had sent two lots of books of their own,
nineteen and twenty-one in number, to be sold for the orphans.

Sept. 12. Still the trial continues. Only nine shillings came in to-day,
given by one of the laborers. In the midst of this great trial of faith
the Lord still mercifully keeps me in great peace. He also allows me to
see that our labor is not in vain; for yesterday died Leah Culliford,
one of the orphans, about nine years old, truly converted, and brought
to the faith some months before her departure.

Sept. 13. No help has come yet. This morning I found it was absolutely
needful to tell the brethren and sisters about the state of the funds,
and to give necessary directions as to going into debt, etc. We prayed
together, and had a very happy meeting. They all seemed comfortable.
Twelve shillings sixpence was taken out of the boxes in the three
houses, twelve shillings one of the laborers gave, and one pound one
shilling had come in for needlework done by the children. One of the
sisters, who is engaged in the work, sent a message after me, not to
trouble myself about her salary, for she should not want any for a
twelvemonth.

Sept. 14. I met again this morning with the brethren and sisters for
prayer, as the Lord has not yet sent help. After prayer one of the
laborers gave me all the money he had, sixteen shillings, saying that it
would not be upright to pray, if he were not to give what he had. One of
the sisters told me that in six days she would give six pounds, which
she had in the savings bank for such a time of need. Up to this day, the
matrons of the three houses had been in the habit of paying the bakers
and the milk-man weekly, _because they had preferred to receive the
payments in this way_, and sometimes it had thus been also with the
butcher and grocer. But now, as the Lord deals out to us _by the day_,
we consider it would be wrong to go on any longer in this way, as the
week's payment might become due, and we have no money to meet it; and
thus those with whom we deal might be inconvenienced by us, and we be
found acting against the commandment of the Lord, "Owe no man anything."
Rom. xiii. 8. From this day, and henceforward, whilst the Lord gives to
us our supplies by the day, we purpose, therefore, to pay at once for
every article as it is purchased, and never to buy any thing except we
can pay for it at once, however much it may seem to be needed, and
however much those with whom we deal may wish to be paid only by the
week. The little which was owed was paid off this day.

Sept. 15. _Saturday._ We met again this morning for prayer. God comforts
our hearts. We are looking for help. I found that there were provisions
enough for to-day and to-morrow, but there was no money in hand to take
in bread as usual, in order that the children might not have newly baked
bread. This afternoon one of the laborers, who had been absent for
several days from Bristol, returned, and gave one pound. This evening we
met again for prayer, when I found that ten shillings sixpence more had
come in since the morning. With this one pound ten shillings sixpence we
were able to buy, even this Saturday evening, the usual quantity of
bread (as it might be difficult to get stale bread on Monday morning),
and have some money left. God be praised, who gave us grace to come to
the decision not to take any bread to-day, as usual, nor to buy anything
for which we cannot pay at once. We were very comfortable, thankfully
taking this money out of our Father's hands, as a proof that he still
cares for us, and that, in his own time, he will send us larger sums.




CHAPTER X.

DELIVERANCE.

1838.

    "PERPLEXED BUT NOT IN DESPAIR"--FAITH JUSTIFIED--A LESSON OF
    OBEDIENCE--BOUNTIFUL SUPPLIES--SPIRITUAL INGATHERING--A DAY OF
    MERCIES--TIMELY AID--A SEASON OF PLENTY--OBEDIENCE REWARDED.


Sept. 16, 1838. Lord's day afternoon. We met again for prayer respecting
supplies for the orphans. We are in peace, and our hope is in God, that
he graciously will appear, though but one shilling has come in since
last evening.

Sept. 17. The trial still continues. It is now more and more trying,
even to faith, as each day comes. But I am sure God will send help, if
we can but wait. One of the laborers had had a little money come in, of
which he gave twelve shillings sixpence; another laborer gave eleven
shillings eightpence, being all the money she had left: this, with
seventeen shillings sixpence, which partly had come in, and partly was
in hand, enabled us to pay what needed to be paid, and to purchase
provisions, so that nothing yet, in any way, has been lacking. This
evening I was rather tried respecting the long delay of larger sums
coming; but being led to go to the Scriptures for comfort, my soul was
greatly refreshed, and my faith again strengthened, by Psalm xxxiv., so
that I went very cheerfully to meet with my dear fellow-laborers for
prayer. I read to them the Psalm, and sought to cheer their hearts
through the precious promises contained in it.

Sept. 18. Brother T. had twenty-five shillings in hand, and I had three
shillings. This one pound eight shillings enabled us to buy the meat and
bread which was needed, a little tea for one of the houses, and milk for
all: no more than this is needed. Thus the Lord has provided not only
for this day, but there is bread for two days in hand. Now, however, we
are come to an extremity. The funds are exhausted. The laborers who had
a little money have given as long as they had any left. Now observe how
the Lord helped us! A lady from the neighborhood of London, who brought
a parcel with money from her daughter, arrived four or five days since
in Bristol, and took lodgings next door to the Boys' Orphan House. This
afternoon she herself kindly brought me the money, amounting to three
pounds two shillings and sixpence. We had been reduced so low as to be
on the point of selling those things which could be spared; but this
morning I had asked the Lord, if it might be, to prevent the necessity
of our doing so. That the money had been so near the Orphan Houses for
several days without being given, is a plain proof that it was from the
beginning in the heart of God to help us; but, because he delights in
the prayers of his children, he had allowed us to pray so long; also to
try our faith, and to make the answer much the sweeter. It is indeed a
precious deliverance. I burst out into loud praises and thanks the first
moment I was alone after I had received the money. I met with my
fellow-laborers again this evening for prayer and praise; their hearts
were not a little cheered. This money was this evening divided, and will
comfortably provide for all that will be needed to-morrow.

Sept. 20. Morning. The Lord has again kindly sent in a little. Last
evening was given to me one shilling and sixpence, and this morning one
pound three shillings. Evening. This evening the Lord sent still further
supplies; eight pounds eleven shillings and twopence halfpenny came in,
as a further proof that the Lord is not unmindful of us. There was in
the box of the Girls' Orphan House one pound one shilling, and in that
of the Boys' Orphan House one pound seven shillings and twopence
halfpenny. One of the laborers, in accordance with her promise this day
week, gave six pounds three shillings. About eighteen months ago she saw
it right no longer to have money for herself in the Savings Bank, and
she therefore, in her heart, gave the money which she had there to the
Orphan Houses, intending to draw it in a time of need. Some time since
(she told me this evening) she drew a part of it to buy several useful
articles for the Orphan Houses; now the sum was reduced to six pounds.
When she found out the present need, she went this day week to the
Savings Bank, and gave notice that she wished to draw her money to-day.

Sept. 22. Both yesterday and to-day we have again assembled for prayer
and praise. We are in no immediate want, but on the 29th, nineteen
pounds ten shillings will be due for the rent of the three Orphan
Houses. To-day there was only four shillings and sevenpence in hand for
the other objects of the institution, though it was the payday for some
of the teachers. My comfort was the _living_ God. During this week he
had helped me so repeatedly and in such a remarkable way, as it regards
the Orphan Houses, that it would have been doubly sinful not to have
trusted in him for help under this fresh difficulty. No money came in
this morning. About two, the usual time when the teachers are paid, a
sovereign was given, with which I went immediately to brother T., who
attends to this part of the work, to pay, at least in part, the weekly
salaries. I found that he had received a sovereign in the morning. By
means of this sovereign, together with the one which I had received
_just at the moment when it was needed_, we were helped through this
day.

Sept. 25. Yesterday and the previous days we have continued to assemble
for prayer. In four days the rent for the Orphan Houses will be due, and
we have nothing towards it; also the housekeeping money in the three
houses is now again gone. May the Lord have compassion on us, and
continue to send us help! This morning there was found nine shillings
and sixpence in the box in my house. We met yesterday again for prayer.
To-day I was not able to go, on account of indisposition; I sent,
therefore, to brother T. to request him to divide the eighteen shillings
and sixpence (ten shillings of which had come in last evening, and eight
shillings and sixpence of which we had in hand) between the three
matrons.

Sept. 29. Saturday evening. Prayer has been made for several days past
respecting the rent, which is due this day. I have been looking out for
it, though I knew not whence a shilling was to come. This morning
brother T. called on me, and, as no money had come in, we prayed
together, and continued in supplication from ten till a quarter to
twelve. Twelve o'clock struck, the time when the rent ought to have been
paid, but no money had been sent. For some days past I have repeatedly
had a misgiving, whether the Lord might not disappoint us, in order that
we might be led _to provide by the week, or the day, for the rent_. This
is the second, and only the second, complete failure as to answers of
prayer in the work, during the past four years and six months. The first
was about the half-yearly rent of Castle-Green school-rooms, due July 1,
1837, which had come in only in part by that time. I am now fully
convinced that the rent ought to be put by daily or weekly, as God may
prosper us, in order that the work, even as to this point, may be a
testimony. May the Lord, then, help us to act accordingly, and may he
now mercifully send in the means to pay the rent!

Oct. 2. Tuesday evening. The Lord's holy name be praised! He hath dealt
most bountifully with us during the last three days! The day before
yesterday five pounds came in for the orphans. O, how kind is the Lord!
Always before there has been actual want he has sent help. Yesterday
came in one pound ten shillings more. Thus the expenses of yesterday for
housekeeping were defrayed. The Lord helped me also to pay yesterday the
nineteen pounds ten shillings for the rent. The means for it were thus
obtained: One of the laborers had received through his family ten
pounds, and five pounds besides from a sister in the Lord; also some
other money. Of this he gave sixteen pounds, which, with the three
pounds ten shillings that was left of the above-mentioned five pounds,
made up nineteen pounds ten shillings, the sum which was needed. This
day we were again greatly reduced. There was no money in hand to take in
bread, as usual, for the Boys' and Infant Orphan Houses. But again the
Lord helped. A sister who had arrived this afternoon from Swansea
brought one pound seven shillings, and one of the laborers sold an
article, by means of which he was able to give one pound thirteen
shillings. Thus we had three pounds,--one pound for each house,--and
could buy bread before the day was over. Hitherto we have lacked
nothing!

Oct. 9. To-day we were brought lower than ever. The provisions would
have lasted out only to-day, and the money for milk in one of the houses
could only be made up by one of the laborers selling one of his books.
The matron in the Boys' Orphan House had this morning two shillings
left. When in doubt whether to buy bread with it, or more meat, to make
up the dinner with the meat which she had in the house, the baker
called, and left three quarterns of bread as a present. In this great
need, some money having been given to one of the laborers, he gave two
pounds of it, by which we were able to buy meat, bread, and other
provisions.

Oct. 10. The coals in the Infant Orphan House are out, and nearly so in
the other two houses. Also the treacle casks in all the three houses are
nearly empty. On this account we have asked the Lord for fresh supplies.

Oct. 11. The "Father of the fatherless" has again shown his care over
us. An orphan from Devonshire arrived last evening. With her was sent
two pounds five shillings and sixpence. The sister who brought her gave
also a silver tea-pot, sugar-basin, and cream-jug, of the weight of
forty-eight ounces, having found true riches in Christ. There was also
in the boxes nine shillings. One of the laborers paid for a ton of
coals. We obtained sixteen pounds sixteen shillings for the silver
articles. Thus we were helped through the heavy expenses of the
following days.

Oct. 12. To-day seven brethren and sisters were added to us in
fellowship, and eight were proposed. May the Lord send helpers for the
work!

Oct. 15. I knew that there would be money needed this morning for many
things in the Orphan Houses, and my heart was therefore lifted up to the
Lord. Just when I was going to meet my fellow-laborers for prayer, I
received from Trowbridge four pounds. There had come in also at the
Orphan Houses seven shillings and threepence. To this one of the
laborers added one pound. Thus I was enabled abundantly to supply all
that was wanted, and to pay for a cask of treacle and a ton of coals. We
are now, however, cast again on the love of our Lord for further
supplies, as there is neither anything in hand, nor have the laborers
any more of their own to give.

Oct. 16. I was looking up to the Lord for help early this morning, when,
almost immediately afterwards, brother T. came, and brought two silver
tablespoons and six teaspoons, which had been left anonymously,
yesterday afternoon, at the Girls' Orphan House. This afternoon I
received twelve pounds from Staffordshire.

Oct. 22. To-day our funds were again quite low. In the Infant Orphan
House only twopence was left, and very little in the other two houses.
But the Lord most manifestly again answered prayer, by sending four
pounds three shillings and one penny.

Oct. 27. Thanks to our adorable Lord! this day also we have not been
confounded; for there was six shillings in the box at the Infant Orphan
House, and six shillings came in for things which had been given to be
sold. To this one of the laborers added eighteen shillings. By means of
this one pound ten shillings we have been able to meet all pressing
demands, and to procure provisions for to-day and to-morrow.

Oct. 29. Monday. The Lord has again given us this day our daily bread,
though in the morning there was not the least natural prospect of
obtaining supplies.

Oct. 30. This has been again a day of peculiar mercies in reference to
the funds. Whilst I was in prayer respecting them a brother brought two
and a quarter yards of cloth. He had bought it for himself; but
afterwards, considering that he had sufficient clothes, he gave it to be
sold for the orphans. This evening a sister gave me twenty pounds, ten
of which were for the Orphans, and ten for the other objects.

Nov. 7. The funds are now again completely exhausted.

Nov. 10. Saturday. All seemed to be dark, so far as regards natural
appearances, at the commencement of this day. But the Lord has helped
us, and enabled us to meet all demands. We were brought to the close of
one more week, having been able to supply the necessities of
ninety-seven persons in the Orphan Houses, without owing anything.

Nov. 13. This morning our want was again great. I have twenty pounds in
hand which has been put by for rent, but, for the Lord's honor, I would
not take of it. Nothing had come in, and the laborers had scarcely
anything to give. I went, however, to the Orphan Houses, to pray with my
fellow-laborers, and, if it might be, to comfort them, and see what
could be done. When I came there I found that nineteen shillings and
sixpence had come in this morning. On inquiry I heard that only two
shillings and sixpence more was needed to carry us through the day. This
one of the laborers was able to add of his own. Thus the Lord has again
helped us out of our difficulty. One of the laborers gave some things
which he could do without, and another gave a workbox to be sold for the
orphans. Before this day has come to an end, the Lord has sent in one
pound two shillings and fourpence more, so that we have also a little
for to-morrow.

Nov. 20. To-day our need was exceedingly great, but the Lord's help was
great also. I went to meet with the brethren and sisters as usual. I
found that one pound would be needed to supply the necessities of
to-day, but three shillings only had come in. Just when we were going to
pray, one of the laborers came in, who, after prayer, gave ten
shillings. Whilst we were praying, another laborer came in, who had
received one pound. Thus we had one pound thirteen shillings,--even
more, therefore, than was absolutely needed.

Nov. 21. Never were we so reduced in funds as to-day. There was not a
single halfpenny in hand between the matrons of the three houses.
Nevertheless, there was a good dinner, and by managing so as to help one
another with bread, etc., there was a prospect of getting over this day
also; but for none of the houses had we the prospect of being able to
take in bread. When I left the brethren and sisters at one o'clock,
after prayer, I told them that we must wait for help, and see how the
Lord would deliver us at this time. I was sure of help, but we were
indeed straitened. When I came to Kingsdown, I felt that I needed more
exercise, being very cold, wherefore I went not the nearest way home,
but round by Clarence-place. About twenty yards from my house I met a
brother, who walked back with me, and after a little conversation gave
me ten pounds to be handed over to the brethren, the deacons, towards
providing the poor saints with coals, blankets, and warm clothing; also
five pounds for the orphans, and five pounds for the other objects of
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. The brother had called twice while
I was gone to the Orphan Houses, and had I now been _one half minute_
later I should have missed him. But the Lord knew our need, and
therefore allowed me to meet him.

Nov. 24. This again has been a very remarkable day. We had as little in
hand this morning as at any time, and yet several pounds were needed.
But God, who is rich in mercy, and whose word so positively declares
that none who trust in him shall be confounded, has helped us through
this day also. While I was in prayer, about ten in the morning,
respecting the funds, I was informed that a gentleman had called to see
me. He came to inform me that a lady had ordered three sacks of potatoes
to be sent to the Orphan Houses. Never could they have come more
seasonably. This was an encouragement to me to continue to expect help.
When I came to the prayer meeting, about twelve o'clock, I heard that
two shillings had come in, also one pound for a guitar, which had been
given for sale. The payment for this guitar had been expected for many
weeks. It had been mentioned among us repeatedly that it might come just
at a time when we most needed it; and O, how true! But with all this we
could not have put by the rents for this week, amounting to thirty
shillings. One of the laborers therefore gave his watch to the orphan
fund, under this condition, that should the Lord not enable us before
December 21 to make up this deficiency, it should be sold, but not
otherwise, as he needs it in the Lord's service. [A few days after the
Lord gave the means to put by the thirty shillings, and thirty shillings
besides for the next week's rent.] Thus the Lord helped us through this
day, and with it brought us to the close of one more week.

Nov. 28. This is perhaps of all days the most remarkable as yet, so far
as it regards the funds. When I was in prayer this morning respecting
them, I was enabled firmly to believe that the Lord would send help,
though all seemed dark as to natural appearances. At twelve o'clock I
met as usual with the brethren and sisters for prayer. There had come in
only one shilling, which was left last evening anonymously at the Infant
Orphan House, and which, except twopence, had already been spent, on
account of the great need. I heard also that an individual had
gratuitously cleaned the timepiece in the Infant Orphan House, and had
offered to keep the timepieces in the three houses in repair. Thus the
Lord gave even in this a little encouragement, and a proof that he is
still mindful of us. On inquiry, I found that there was everything
needful for the dinner in all the three houses; but neither in the
Infant nor Boys' Orphan Houses was there bread enough for tea, nor money
to buy milk. Lower we had never been, and perhaps never so low. We gave
ourselves now unitedly to prayer, laying the case in simplicity before
the Lord. Whilst in prayer there was a knock at the door, and one of the
sisters went out. After the two brethren who labor in the Orphan Houses
and I had prayed aloud, we continued for a while silently in prayer. As
to myself, I was lifting up my heart to the Lord to make a way for our
escape, and in order to know if there were any other thing which I could
do with a good conscience, besides waiting on him, so that we might have
food for the children. At last we rose from our knees. I said, "God will
surely send help." The words had not quite passed over my lips, when I
perceived a letter lying on the table, which had been brought whilst we
were in prayer. It was from my wife, containing another letter from a
brother with ten pounds for the orphans. The evening before last I was
asked by a brother whether the balance in hand for the orphans would be
as great this time, when the accounts would be made up, as the last
time. My answer was that it would be as great as the Lord pleased. The
next morning this brother was moved to remember the orphans, and to send
to-day ten pounds, which arrived after I had left my house, and which,
on account of our need, was forwarded immediately to me. The brother who
sent the ten pounds for the orphans sent likewise ten pounds to be
divided between brother Craik and me, with the object of purchasing new
clothes for ourselves.

Nov. 29. The Lord has greatly blessed our meetings for prayer. They have
been instrumental in leading us to much prayer for the children in the
Orphan Houses, in the day schools, and in the Sunday school. They have
led us to prayer for ourselves, for the day-school teachers, and for the
Sunday-school teachers, that grace may be given to us so to walk before
the children, and so to deal with them, as that the Lord may be
glorified by us. We have also often been led to intercede for the
believers with whom we are in fellowship, and for the church at large.
We have especially prayed that our work may lead the church generally to
a more simple confidence and trust in the Lord. That these meetings have
not been in vain, as regards the procuring of funds, has been already
sufficiently seen by the many instances which have been recorded in the
foregoing pages. To-day, however, we have had another particular proof
of this. When we met I found that ten shillings had come in yesterday
afternoon. When I returned home I found one pound had come in, and
shortly after I received another pound. In the evening I received fifty
pounds, which was sent from Suffolk by a sister who had often expressed
how gladly she would contribute more largely to the work which is in our
hands had she the means, and who just now, in this our time of need, has
obtained the means to carry out the desire of her heart. I rejoice in
the last donation particularly, not because of the largeness of the sum,
but because it enables me to pay to my brethren and sisters in the
Orphan Houses the salary which is due to them.

Dec. 6. This afternoon I received one hundred pounds from a
sister,--fifty for the orphans, and fifty for the school, Bible, and
missionary fund. This same sister, who earns her bread with her own
hands, had given, on October 5, 1837, fifty pounds towards the Boys'
Orphan House, and gave for the necessities of the poor saints, in
August, 1838, one hundred pounds more; for she had been made willing to
act out those precious exhortations: "Having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content." "Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide
yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that
faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth." "Lay
not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal." Respecting
the fifty pounds which has been given of this sum for the school, Bible,
and missionary fund, it is worthy of remark, that we would not order
reference Bibles till we had the means. We had repeatedly prayed
respecting this want of Bibles, and particularly again this morning. It
had been also much laid on our hearts to-day to request that the Lord
would enable us to have the Report printed, which we could not do unless
he first sent the means. Lastly, we had also repeatedly asked him to
supply us so largely, if it were his will, as that at the time of the
public meetings we might be able to speak again of abundance. For though
for some months past the time has been fixed for the public meetings,
without any reference to the state of the funds, nevertheless, it might
have had the appearance that we had convened the brethren for the sake
of telling them about our poverty, and thus to induce them to give.

Dec. 11, 12, and 13. On the evenings of these three days there were
public meetings, at which I gave an account of the Lord's dealing with
us in reference to the Orphan Houses and the other objects of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution. As the work, and particularly that of
the Orphan Houses, was begun for the benefit of the church at large, it
appeared well to us that from time to time it should be publicly stated
how the Lord had dealt with us in reference to it; and as, on Dec. 9,
the third year had been completed since the commencement of the orphan
work, this seemed to be a suitable time for having these meetings.

I notice briefly the following particulars respecting the first three
objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. 1. There is at
present--December, 1838--a Sunday school supported by it, which contains
four hundred and sixty-three children. This part of the work calls for
particular thanksgiving; for during these last eighteen months the
number of the children has been nearly three times as great as it used
to be. Five of the scholars have been converted within the last two
years, and are now in fellowship with the church, and three of them are
teachers in the school. 2. There is in connection with the Institution
an adult school, in which, since the commencement of the work, above
one hundred and twenty adults have been instructed, and in which at
present twelve are taught to read. 3. The Institution has entirely
supported, since its commencement, several day schools for poor
children, and within the last two years six of such,--three for boys and
three for girls. The number of all the children that have had schooling
in the day schools through the medium of the Institution, since its
formation, amounts to 1,534; the number of those at present in the six
day schools is 342. 4. During the last two years there have been
circulated 1,884 copies of the Scriptures in connection with the
Institution, and since the beginning of the work, March 5, 1834, 5,078
copies. 5. For missionary purposes have been laid out £74, 18s. 4d. 6.
The total of the income for the first three objects, during the last two
years, was £1,129, 13s. 1d.; the total of the expense, £1,111, 13s. 7½d.

There are, at present, 86 orphans in the three houses, _i. e._ 31 in the
Girls' Orphan House, 31 in the Infant Orphan House, and 24 in the Boys'
Orphan House. The whole number of orphans who have been under our care
from April 11, 1836, to Dec. 9, 1838, amounts to 110.

The total of the income for the orphans, from Dec. 9, 1836, to Dec. 9,
1838, has amounted to £1,341, 4s. 7d.; the total of the expenses to
£1,664, 4s. 0¾d. There was two years ago a balance of £373, 4s.
8¼d. in hand, and now the balance is £50, 5s. 3d.

Dec. 16. There was a paper anonymously put into the box at Bethesda
Chapel containing four pounds ten shillings. In the paper was written,
"For the rent of the Orphan Houses, from Dec. 10 to Dec. 31, 1838. 'O,
taste and see that the _Lord is good_: _blessed_ is the man that
_trusteth in him_!'" In order that the reader may be able to enter into
the value of this donation, I would request him to read over once more
what I wrote under "Sept. 29" of this year. [The individual who gave
this four pounds ten shillings for the rent of the Orphan Houses for the
first three weeks after the public meetings, at which the matter about
the rent, for the instruction of the brethren, was fully stated,
continued for three years, up to Dec. 10, 1841, to give regularly, but
anonymously, one pound ten shillings a week for the same purpose, which
was exactly the sum required every week for the rent of those three
houses. Thus the Lord rewarded our faithfulness in carrying out the
light which he had given us. But the chief blessing resulting from this
circumstance I consider to be this,--that several brethren, who earn
their bread by the labor of their hands, have learned through this
circumstance that it is the will of the Lord they should lay by their
rent weekly. I beseech those brethren who are not pursuing this course
to do so, and they will soon prove by experience the benefit of acting
on scriptural principles even as it regards this life.]

Dec. 17. To-day eleven brethren and sisters were proposed for
fellowship.

Dec. 20. As the expenses for the orphans have been above forty-seven
pounds within the last six days, and as but little above thirteen pounds
has come in, and as the money for printing the Report had to be kept
back, in order that we might not be in debt, we were again to-day very
low in funds, though it is but six days since the public meetings. As I
knew that to-morrow several pounds would be needed to supply the
matrons, I gave myself this morning to prayer. About a quarter of an
hour afterwards I received three pounds, the payment of a legacy left by
a sister, who fell asleep in Jesus several months since, in Ireland.
Besides this I received from the brother through whom the legacy was
paid, two pounds ten shillings for the orphan fund. With this five
pounds ten shillings I hope to be able to meet the expenses of
to-morrow.

Dec. 22. _A solemn day._ I received to-day the information that my
brother died on October 7. "_Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right?_" must be the stay of the believer at such a time, and, by grace,
it is my stay now. _I know_ that the Lord is glorified in my brother,
whatever his end has been. May the Lord make this event a lasting
blessing to me, especially in leading me to earnestness in prayer for my
father!


REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1838.

1. As to the church. There are 405 at present in fellowship with us; 61
having been added last year, of whom 36 have been brought among us to
the knowledge of the truth.

2. As to my temporal supplies. The Lord has been pleased to give me
during the past year £350, 4s. 8d.

During no period of my life had I such need of means, on account of my
own long illness and that of my dear wife, and on account of the _many_
and _particular_ calls for means, as during the past year; but also
during no period of my life has the Lord so richly supplied me. Truly,
it must be manifest to all that I have served a most kind Master, during
this year also, and that, even for this life, it is by far the best
thing to seek to act according to the mind of the Lord as to temporal
things!




CHAPTER XI.

ASKING AND RECEIVING.

1839.

    HELP FOR THE POOR SAINTS--THE UNFAILING BANK--MEANS
    EXHAUSTED--LIBERALITY OF A LABORING SISTER--"HE KNOWETH OUR
    FRAME"--REDEEMING THE TIME--GODLINESS PROFITABLE UNTO ALL
    THINGS.


January 1, 2, and 3, 1839. We have had three especial church prayer
meetings these three days. The year commenced with mercies. _In the
first hour_ of the year there came in for the orphans two pounds seven
shillings, which was given after our usual prayer meeting on December
31, which this time lasted from seven in the evening till after
midnight.

Jan. 5. To-day I received another new hat, the eleventh which in
succession has been given to me since I have been in England.

Jan. 20. For some time past it has appeared to me that the words, "Ye
have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye may do them
good," which the Lord spoke to his disciples, _who were themselves very
poor_, imply that the children of God, as such, have power with God to
bring temporal blessings upon poor saints or poor unbelievers through
the instrumentality of prayer. Accordingly, I have been led to ask the
Lord for means to assist poor saints; and at different times he has
stirred up his children to intrust me with sums, both large and small,
_for that especial object_; or has, by some means or other, put money at
my disposal, which I might so use. In like manner I had been asking
again for means, a few days since, to be able more extensively to assist
the poor saints in communion with us, as just now many of them are not
merely tried by the _usual_ temporal difficulties arising from its being
winter, but especially from the high price of bread. And now this
evening the Lord has given me the answer to my prayer. When I came home
from the meeting I found a brother at my house who offered to give me
ten pounds a week, for twelve weeks, towards providing the poor saints
with coals and needful articles of clothing, but chiefly with bread.
[Accordingly, this brother sent me, two days afterwards, one hundred and
twenty pounds, whereby very many, especially poor widows, were greatly
assisted, chiefly with flour and bread. This money just lasted till the
price of bread was reduced from ninepence halfpenny to sevenpence
halfpenny.]

Feb. 7. This day has been one of the most remarkable days as it regards
the funds. There was no money in hand. I was waiting upon God. I had
asked him repeatedly, but no supplies came. Brother T. called, between
eleven and twelve o'clock, to tell me that about one pound two shillings
would be needed, to take in bread for the three houses and to meet the
other expenses; but we had only two shillings ninepence, which yesterday
had been taken out of the boxes in the Orphan Houses. He went to Clifton
to make arrangements for the reception of the three orphans of our
sister Loader, who fell asleep on the 4th; for, though we have no funds
in hand, the work goes on, and our confidence is not diminished. I
therefore requested him to call, on his way back from Clifton, to see
whether the Lord might have sent any money in the mean time. When he
came I had received nothing, but one of the laborers, having five
shillings of his own, gave it. It was now four o'clock. I knew not how
the sisters had got through the day. Toward the close of the day I went
to the Girls' Orphan House, to meet with the brethren for prayer. When I
arrived there I found that a box had come for me from Barnstable. The
carriage was paid, else there would have been no money to pay for it.
(See how the Lord's hand is in the smallest matters!) The box was
opened, and it contained, in a letter from a sister, ten pounds, of
which eight pounds was for the orphans, and two pounds for the Bible
Fund; from brethren at Barnstable, two pounds eleven shillings twopence;
and from another brother, five shillings. Besides this, there were in
the box four yards of merino, three pairs of new shoes, two pairs of new
socks; also six books for sale; likewise a gold pencil-case, two gold
rings, two gold drops of earrings, a necklace, and a silver pencil-case.
On inquiry how the sisters had been carried through the day, I found it
thus: Everything was in the houses which was needed for dinner. After
dinner a lady from Thornbury came and bought one of my Narratives and
one of the Reports, and gave three shillings besides. About five minutes
afterwards the baker came to the Boys' Orphan House. The matron of the
Girls' Orphan House seeing him, went immediately with the six shillings
sixpence which she had just received (to prevent his being sent away, as
there was no money in hand at the Boys' Orphan House), and bought bread
to the amount of four shillings sixpence. The two remaining shillings,
with the little which was in hand, served to buy bread for the Girls'
Orphan House. By the donations sent in the box I was enabled to give a
rich supply to the matrons before the close of the day.

February 13. This evening five pounds was given me, which had come in
under the following circumstances: A gentleman and lady visited the
Orphan Houses, and met at the Boys' Orphan House two ladies who were
likewise visiting. One of the ladies said to the matron of the Boys'
Orphan House, "Of course you cannot carry on these Institutions without
a good stock of funds." The gentleman, turning to the matron, said,
"Have you a good stock?" She replied, "Our funds are deposited in a bank
which cannot break." The tears came into the eyes of the inquiring lady.
The gentleman, on leaving, gave to the master of the boys five pounds,
which came in _when I had not a penny in hand_.

March 5. To-day, however, I knew that there would be again several
pounds required, as, besides the daily provisions, there were coals
needed, the treacle casks in two houses were empty, and there was but
five shillings in hand. I gave myself therefore to prayer this morning.
WHILST I WAS IN PRAYER Q. Q. sent a check for seven pounds ten
shillings.

March 23. To-day I received a letter from brother T., who is, on account
of his health, in Devonshire, to inform me that a heavy gold chain, a
ring set with ten brilliants, a pair of gold bracelets, and two pounds,
have been given to him. He gave a Report to a brother, who, having read
it, was thereby stirred up to prayer, and knowing that his believing
sister possessed these trinkets, he asked the Lord to incline her heart
to give them up for the benefit of our orphans, which she soon after
did. By means of these donations I am able both to meet the remaining
expenses of this week, and also to pay fifteen pounds, which still
remains due on account of the salaries. My fellow-laborers not only
never ask me for anything, but are willing to part with money, or
anything else, in the hour of need; nevertheless, I asked the Lord about
this point frequently, and he has now given me my request, whereof I am
glad.

April 13. I conversed with another of the orphans, who seems to have
been truly converted, and who has walked consistently for many months.
To-morrow she will be united with the saints in communion.

April 14. To-day five pounds eightpence came in for the orphans, one
pound of which is one of the most remarkable gifts that we have ever
had. A poor brother, with a large family and small wages,--there are
eight in the family, and he had fifteen shillings wages till lately,
when they were raised to eighteen shillings--put by this money by little
and little of what was given him by his master for beer. This brother,
who was converted about five years ago, was before that time a notorious
drunkard.

July 2. To-day was given to me, _when there was not one shilling in
hand_, fifty pounds, for the school, Bible, and missionary fund.

July 15. Monday. To-day two pounds seven shillings threepence was needed
for the orphans, but we had nothing. How to obtain the means for a
dinner, and for what else was needed, I knew not. My heart was perfectly
at peace, and unusually sure of help, though I knew not in the least
whence it was to come. Before brother T. came, I received a letter from
India, written in May, with an order for fifty pounds for the orphans. I
had said last Saturday to brother T. that it would be desirable to have
fifty pounds, as the salaries of all my fellow-laborers are due, the
three treacle casks empty, all the provision stores exhausted, several
articles of clothing needed, and worsted for the boys to go on with
their knitting.

August 19. Monday. This has been again a day in which our faith has been
particularly tried; but even this day we have not been confounded. Not
one penny was in hand when the day began. We had, therefore, now, for
more than one hundred persons, again to look to the Lord. But this I
must say, to the praise of the Lord, my soul was perfectly at peace. I
meant to have gone very early to the Orphan Houses to meet with my
fellow-laborers for prayer; but as one person after the other called
upon me, I was kept from it the whole morning. When brother T. called
upon me, between twelve and one o'clock, for money, I had none to give.
In the afternoon at four I was able to meet with the brethren and
sisters. When I came to the Girls' Orphan House, I found that one of
those children, for the reception of whom we had given notice, had been
brought from Bath, and with him was sent one pound five shillings. After
the meeting was over one of the laborers gave ten shillings. By means of
this one pound fifteen shillings we were able for this day also to
provide everything needful.

August 22. In my morning walk, when I was reminding the Lord of our
need, I felt assured that he would send help this day. My assurance
sprang from our need; for there seemed no way to get through the day
without help being sent. After breakfast I considered whether there was
anything which might be turned into money for the dear children. Among
other things there came under my hands a number of religious pamphlets
which had been given for the benefit of the orphans; but all seemed not
nearly enough to meet the necessities of the day. In this our deep
poverty, after I had gathered together the few things for sale, a
sister, _who earns her bread by the labor of her hands_, brought
eighty-two pounds. This sister had seen it to be binding upon believers
in our Lord Jesus to act out his commandments: "Sell that ye have (sell
your possessions) and give alms," Luke xii. 33; and "Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth," Matt. vi. 19. Accordingly, she had
drawn her money out of the bank and stocks, being two hundred and fifty
pounds, and had brought it to me at three different times, for the
benefit of the orphans, the Bible, missionary, and school fund, and the
poor saints. About two months ago she brought me one hundred pounds
more, being the produce of some other possession which she had sold,
the half of which was to be used for the school Bible, and missionary
fund, and the other half for the poor saints. This eighty-two pounds
which she has brought to-day is the produce of the sale of her last
earthly possession. [At the time I am preparing this fifth edition for
the press, more than sixteen years have passed away, and this sister has
never expressed the least regret as to the step she took, but goes on
quietly laboring with her hands to earn her bread.]

September 4. I have been led to pray whether it is the Lord's will that
I should leave Bristol for a season, as I have for the last fortnight
been suffering from indigestion, by which my whole system is weakened,
and thus the nerves of my head are more than usually affected. There
are, however, two hindrances in the way--want of means for the orphans,
and want of means for my own personal expenses. To-day I have received a
check from Q. Q. for seven pounds ten shillings for the orphans, which
came, therefore, very seasonably. Also four pounds besides have come in
since the day before yesterday.

September 5. To-day a sister sent me five pounds for myself, to be used
for the benefit of my health. She had heard that my health is again
failing. I do not lay by money for such purposes; but whenever I really
need means, whether for myself or others, the Lord sends them, in answer
to prayer; for he had in this case again given me prayer respecting
means for myself, and for the orphans, that my way might be made plain
as to leaving Bristol for a season.

September 7. Trowbridge. This has been a very good day. I have had much
communion with the Lord. How kind to take me from the work in Bristol
for a season, to give me more communion with himself. I remembered the
Lord's especial goodness to me in this place at the commencement of last
year. How kind has he also been since! I prayed much for myself, for
the church at large, for the saints here and in Bristol, for my
unconverted relatives, for my dear wife, and that the Lord would supply
my own temporal necessities, and those of the orphans; and _I know that
he has heard me_. I am surrounded with kind friends in the dear saints,
under whose roof I am, and feel quite at home. My room is _far better_
than I need: yet an easy chair, _in this my weak state of body_, to
kneel before in prayer, would have added to my comfort. In the
afternoon, without having a hint about it, I found an easy chair put
into my room. I was struck with the kindness, the especial kindness of
my heavenly Father, in being mindful of the smallest wants and comforts
of his child. Having had more prayer than usual, I found that my
intercourse with the saints at tea was with unction, and more than
usually profitable.

September 9. I returned to Bristol, to go from hence to-morrow to
Exeter, if the Lord permit, on account of my health. I had been
earnestly asking the Lord while I was staying at Trowbridge that he
would be pleased to send in supplies for the orphans before I go into
Devonshire, and I had the fullest assurance that means would come in
before I left Bristol. I therefore asked my wife, on my return, how much
had come in, and found that it was only eight pounds nine shillings
seven and three-fourths pence. This was not nearly as much as I had
expected, and would not answer the end for which I had particularly
asked means, _i. e._ that I might be able to leave enough for several
days. My reply, therefore, was according to the faith given to me, and
judging from the earnestness and confidence of my prayer _that the Lord
would send more before I left_. About an hour after, brother Craik
brought me ten pounds, and also a letter, in which the arrival of a
large box full of articles, to be sold for the benefit of the orphans,
is announced.

    Upon his return from his journey, Mr. M.  writes:--

During my stay at Plymouth, I was stirred up afresh to early rising, a
blessing, the results of which I have not lost since. That which led me
to it was the example of the brother in whose house I was staying, and a
remark which he made in speaking on the sacrifices in Leviticus, "that
as not the refuse of the animals was to be offered up, _so the best part
of our time_ should be especially given to communion with the Lord." I
had been, on the whole, rather an early riser during former years. But
since the nerves of my head had been so weak, I thought that, as the day
was long enough for my strength, it would be best for me not to rise
early, in order that thus the nerves of my head might have the longer
quiet. On this account I rose only between six and seven, and sometimes
after seven. For the same reason also I brought myself _purposely_ into
the habit of sleeping a quarter of an hour, or half an hour, after
dinner: as I thought I found benefit from it, in quieting the nerves of
my head. In this way, however, my soul had suffered more or less every
day, and sometimes considerably, as now and then unavoidable work came
upon me before I had had sufficient time for prayer and reading the
word. After I had heard the remark to which I have alluded, I determined
that, whatever my body might suffer, I would no longer let the most
precious part of the day pass away while I was in bed. By the grace of
God I was enabled to begin the very next day to rise earlier; and have
continued to rise early since that time. I allow myself now about seven
hours' sleep, which, though I am far from being strong, and have much to
tire me mentally, I find is quite sufficient to refresh me. In addition
to this I gave up the sleeping after dinner. The result has been that I
have thus been able to procure long and precious seasons for prayer and
meditation before breakfast; and as to my body, and the state of the
nervous system in particular, I have been _much better_ since. Indeed, I
believe that the very worst thing I could have done for my weak nerves
was to have lain an hour or more longer in bed than I used to do before
my illness; for it was the very way to keep them weak. As this may fall
into the hands of some children of God who are not in the habit of
rising early, I make a few more remarks on the subject.

I. It might be asked, How much time shall I allow myself for rest? The
answer is, that no rule of universal application can be given, as all
persons do not require the same measure of sleep, and also the same
persons, at different times, according to the strength or weakness of
their body, may require more or less. Females also, being generally
weaker in body, require more sleep than males. Yet, from what I can
learn, it is the opinion of medical persons that men in health do not
require more than between six and seven hours' sleep, and females no
more than between seven and eight hours; so that it would be rather _an
exception_ for a man to require more than seven and a woman more than
eight hours. But my decided advice, at the same time, is, that children
of God would be careful not to allow themselves _too little_ sleep, as
there are few men who can do with less than six hours' sleep, and yet be
well in body and mind, and few females who can do with less than seven
hours. Certain it is that for a long time, as a young man, before I went
to the university, I went to bed regularly at ten and rose at four,
studied hard, and was in good health; and certain also, that since I
have allowed myself only about seven hours, from the time of my visit at
Plymouth in Oct. 1839, I have been much better in body, and in my nerves
in particular, than when I was eight or eight hours and a half in bed.

II. If it be asked, But why should I rise early? The reply is, "To
remain too long in bed" is, 1. _Waste of time_, which is unbecoming a
saint, who is bought by the precious blood of Jesus, with his _time_ and
all he has, to be used for the Lord. If we sleep more than is needful
for the refreshment of the body, it is wasting the time with which the
Lord has intrusted us as a talent, to be used for his glory, for our own
benefit, and the benefit of the saints and the unbelievers around us. 2.
To remain too long in bed _injures the body_. Just as when we take too
much food, we are injured thereby, so as it regards sleep. Medical
persons would readily allow that the lying longer in bed than is needful
for the strengthening of the body does _weaken_ it. 3. _It injures the
soul._ The lying too long in bed not merely keeps us from giving the
most precious part of the day to prayer and meditation, but this sloth
leads also to _many other evils_. Any one need but make the experiment
of spending one, two, or three hours in prayer and meditation before
breakfast, either in his room, or with his Bible in his hand in the
fields, and he will soon find out the beneficial effect which early
rising has upon the outward and inward man. I beseech all my brethren
and sisters into whose hands this may fall, and who are not in the habit
of rising early, to make the trial, and they will praise the Lord for
having done so.

III. It may lastly be said, But how shall I set about rising early? My
advice is, 1. Commence at once, delay it not. To-morrow begin to rise.
2. But do not depend upon your own strength. This may be the reason why
before this you may have begun to rise early, but have given it up. As
surely as you depend upon your own strength in this matter, it will come
to nothing. In every good work we depend upon the Lord, and in this
thing we shall feel _especially_ how weak we are. If any one rises that
he may give the time which he takes from sleep to prayer and meditation,
let him be sure that Satan will try to put obstacles into the way. 3.
Do trust in the Lord for help. You will honor him if you _expect_ help
from him in this matter. Give yourself to prayer for help, expect help,
and you will have it. 4. Use, however, in addition to this, the
following means: _a._ Go early to bed. If you stay up late, you cannot
rise early. Let no society and no pressure of engagements keep you from
going _habitually_ early to bed. If you fail in this, you neither can
nor ought to get up early, as your body requires rest. Keep also
particularly in mind, that neither for the body nor soul is it the same
thing whether you go to bed _late_ and rise _late_, or whether you go to
bed _early_ and rise _early_. Even medical persons will tell you how
injurious it is to sit up late, and to spend the morning hours in bed;
but how much more important still is it to retire early and to rise
early, in order to _make sure of time for prayer and meditation before
the business of the day commences_, and to devote to those exercises
that part of our time when the mind and the body are _most fresh_, in
order thus to obtain spiritual strength for the conflict, the trials,
and the work of the day. _b._ Let some one call you, if possible, at the
time which you have determined before God that you will rise; or
procure, what is still better, an alarum, by which you may regulate
almost to a minute the time when you wish to rise. For about twelve
shillings a little German clock with an alarum may be bought almost in
every town. Though I have very many times been awakened by the Lord, in
answer to prayer, almost to the minute when I desired to rise; yet I
thought it well to procure an alarum to assist me in my purpose of
rising early: not indeed as if it could give the least help, without the
Lord's blessing, for I should remain in bed notwithstanding the noise of
the alarum, were he not to give me grace to rise; but simply looking
upon it as a means. _c._ Rise at once when you are awake. Remain not a
minute longer in bed, else you are likely to fall asleep again. _d._ Be
not discouraged by feeling drowsy and tired in consequence of your
rising early. This will soon wear off. You will after a few days feel
yourself stronger and fresher than when you used to lie an hour or two
longer than you needed. _e._ Allow yourself always the same hours for
sleep. Make no change except sickness oblige you.

On December 10, 11, and 12 we had public meetings, at which the account
of the Lord's dealings with us in reference to the Orphan Houses and the
other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution was given. It is
now--December 10, 1839--five years and nine months since the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution has been in operation.

During the last year also. 1. We have been enabled to continue to
provide all the needful expenses connected with the six-day schools,
three for boys and three for girls. The number of the children who are
at present in them amounts to 286. The number of all the children that
have had schooling in the day schools, through the medium of the
Institution, since its formation, amounts to 1,795. 2. There are at
present 226 children in the Sunday school. 3. There are 14 taught to
read in the adult school, and there have been about 130 adults
instructed in that school since the formation of the Institution. 4.
There have been circulated, during the last year, 514 copies of the
Scriptures, and 5,592 since March 5, 1834. 5. There has been laid out,
during the last year, £91, 6s. for missionary purposes. 6. There have
been received into the three Orphan Houses, from December 9, 1838, to
December 9, 1839, 16 orphans. There are at present 96 orphans in the
three houses. The number of all the orphans who have been under our care
from April 11, 1836, to December 9, 1839, amounts to 126.

For the Orphan Houses, _without any one having been asked for anything
by us_, the sum of £3,067, 8s. 9¼d. has been given, _entirely as the
result of prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to
December 9, 1839.

The total of the expenses connected with the objects of the Institution,
exclusive of the Orphan Houses, from November 19, 1838, to November 19,
1839, is £542, 13s. The balance in hand on November 19, 1839, was 18s.
5d.

The total of the expenses connected with the three Orphan Houses, from
December 9, 1838, to December 9, 1839, is £960, 9s. 2¾d. The balance
in hand on December 9, 1839, was £46, 8s. 1d.

December 31. My health is much better than for years. My mental powers
also are as good as they have been at any time during the last three
years. I ascribe this to God's blessing, through the instrumentality of
early rising, and plunging my head into cold water when I rise.


REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1839.

1. As to the church: During the last year have been added 115; of whom
34 have been brought to the knowledge of the Lord among us.

2. As to my temporal supplies, the Lord has been pleased to give me,
during the past year, £313, 2s. 5d.




CHAPTER XII.

PLENTY AND WANT.

1840.

    A PURE OFFERING REQUIRED--A JOURNEY PROPOSED--SEASONABLE
    PROVISION--LOOKING ONLY TO THE LORD--THE WRATH OF MAN PRAISING
    GOD--A PROMISE FULFILLED--BENEFIT OF TRIAL--NEW SPRINGS
    OPENED--BEFORE THEY CALL I WILL ANSWER--TRUST IN GOD
    COMMENDED--SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS.


January 1, 1840. This morning, about one hour after midnight, I received
a paper with some money sealed up in it for the orphans. A few minutes
afterwards, I remembered that the individual who gave it was in debt,
and I was aware that she had been repeatedly asked by her creditors for
payment. I resolved, therefore, without opening the paper, to return it,
as no one has a right to give whilst in debt. This was done _when I knew
that there was not enough in hand to meet the expenses of the day_.
About eight, this morning, a brother brought five pounds, which he had
received just then from his mother, for the orphans. Observe, the
brother is led to bring it _at once_!

January 25. I have been much in prayer this week about going to Germany:
1. To see certain brethren who purpose to go as missionaries to the East
Indies; and, 2. To see my father once more. I am led to go just now,
instead of delaying it, because my health is again so failing that it
seems desirable I should leave Bristol at all events; and thus I could
continue to serve in the work of the Lord, and yet attend to the benefit
of my health at the same time. Lord, keep me from making a mistake in
this matter!

January 31. There is only one shilling fivepence in hand. The Lord will
provide! I feel quite comfortable, though in three days I shall have to
leave the work for several weeks. After I had written the above, I
received sixteen pounds for the orphans, and twenty-four pounds for the
other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. Thus Lord will
kindly allow me to leave a little money behind on my departure, and I
have also a still further answer to my prayer for means to purchase
Bibles, for which I have asked the Lord repeatedly, and which he began
to answer by the donation which I received on the 22d. I have received
five pounds, besides, for the other objects.

Feb. 2. To-day and yesterday has come in still further, before my
departure, nearly nine pounds for the orphans. How kind of the Lord to
send this money just now, on the eve of my leaving home!

    Mr. Müller's absence lasted from Feb. 3 to March 9. Under the
    latter date he  writes:--

During the whole time of my absence the Lord not only supplied all the
need of the orphans, but on my return I found more in hand than there
was when I left. The donations, which came in during my absence, amount
to between eighty and ninety pounds.

March 26. On the 17th of this month I received the following letter from
a brother who several times had been used by the Lord as an instrument
in supplying our need, and who also, two months since, sent thirty
pounds.

"I have received a little money from ----. Have you any _present_ need
for the Institution under your care? I know you do not _ask_, except
indeed of Him whose work you are doing; but to _answer when asked_ seems
another thing, and a right thing. I have a reason for desiring to know
the present state of your means towards the objects you are laboring to
serve, viz. should you _not have_ need, other departments of the Lord's
work, or other people of the Lord, _may have_ need. Kindly then inform
me, and to what amount, _i. e._ what amount you at this present time
need, or can profitably lay out."

At the time when this letter came we were indeed in need. Nevertheless,
I considered that, as I have hitherto acted (_i. e._ telling the Lord
alone about our need), I ought to continue to do, as otherwise the
principal object of the work, to be a help to the saints generally, by
seeking to lead them to increased dependence upon God _alone_, through
this Institution, would be frustrated. I answered therefore the letter
in substance as follows:--

"Whilst I thank you for your love, and whilst I agree with you, that, in
general, there is a difference between _asking for money_ and _answering
when asked_, nevertheless in our case I feel not at liberty to speak
about the state of our funds, as the primary object of the work in my
hands is to lead those who are weak in faith to see that there is
_reality_ in dealing with God _alone_."

After having sent off the answer, I was again and again led to pray to
the Lord in this way: "Lord, thou knowest that for thy sake I did not
tell this brother about our need. Now, Lord, show afresh that there is
_reality_ in speaking to thee _only_ about our need, and speak therefore
to this brother, so that he may help us."

To-day, in answer to this my request, this brother sent one hundred
pounds. Thus I have means for establishing the infant school, and for
ordering more Bibles. Also the orphans are again supplied for a week;
for when the money came in, there was _not one penny_ in hand for them.

April 7. This evening I received information from my little half brother
that my dear father died on March 30. During no period did I pray more
frequently or more earnestly for the conversion of my dear aged parent
than during the last year of his life; but, at all events, it did not
please the Lord to let me _see_ the answer to my prayers.

April 9. We are on the point of sending some money to the East Indies
for missionary objects. _Whilst I was on my knees_ respecting this
object, five pounds was brought for it.

May 2. Nothing having come in for five days, we were to-day again
penniless. In answer to prayer five shillings sixpence came in, and some
trinkets were sent, the names of which the donor does not wish to be
known. Thus we were helped through this day. Observe here how the Lord
allowed five days to pass away without influencing the hearts of any to
send us supplies; but the moment there is real need, the stream runs
again.

May 3. Last evening a brother was baptized, who on the first Lord's day
of this year came with his intended wife to Bethesda Chapel. Both were
in an unconverted state. Only since April 1, forty-one persons have come
to us to speak about their souls.

May 8. There are four believers staying at my house, and to-day we had
only a few shillings of our own money left. I gave myself, therefore, to
prayer for means for our own personal expenses. In answer to my request,
I received this morning five pounds.

May 10. To-day five of the orphans were baptized. There are now fourteen
of them in fellowship.

May 26. Nothing had come in. My engagements kept me from going to the
Orphan Houses till seven in the evening, when the laborers met together
for prayer. When we met I found that one of them had given seventeen
shillings, which had been divided between the three houses. This, with
the little which had been left yesterday, had procured all necessary
articles. We are now very poor.

May 27. We met for prayer at eleven this morning. No money had come in,
but there was enough for dinner in all the houses. This morning the last
coals were used in the Infant Orphan House, and in the Boys' Orphan
House there were only enough for to-day, and there was no money in hand
to buy more. In this our need T. P. C. sent a load of coals. We purpose
to meet again at four this afternoon. May the Lord graciously be pleased
to send help in the mean time!

_Evening._ The Lord has had mercy! A person bought some days since
several articles, which had been given to be sold for the benefit of the
orphans, and owed six pounds fifteen shillings. This morning I asked the
Lord to incline his heart to bring the money, or a part of it, as we
were in such need. Just as I was going to meet for prayer with my
fellow-laborers this afternoon, he came and brought four pounds. But our
kind Father showed us still further to-day that only for the trial of
our faith he had for a season withheld supplies; for there was given
this evening, with Eccles. ix. 10, five pounds. There came in also nine
shillings for articles which had been put into the hand of a sister, who
has taken on her the service of disposing of articles which are given
for sale. Thus the day, which had begun with prayer, ended in praise.
But there is one thing more to be recorded respecting this day, as
precious or more so than what has been said: I was to-day informed that
the Lord has begun to stir up several of the boys to care about their
souls.

June 17. For several days past I had been very poor in reference to my
own temporal necessities, as well as in reference to the orphans. To-day
we were especially poor, in both respects; but our kind Father
remembered not merely the need of the dear orphans, but gave me also
some money for my own personal expenses. The same sister just referred
to, who brought five pounds ten shillings sixpence for the orphans,
brought me also seven pounds for myself.

June 22. To-morrow, the Lord willing, I purpose, with my wife, to
accompany the three German brethren and the five German sisters to
Liverpool, who purpose to sail from thence. Under these circumstances it
is desirable to leave at least a little money behind. This desire of my
heart the Lord has granted; for this morning D. C. gave me five pounds,
and there came in by sale of articles ten shillings fivepence. In the
evening a sister, who has left Bristol to-day, sent me by her mother
five pounds.

    During the absence of Mr. M. the wants of the orphans were
    supplied in a wonderful manner. To mention but one instance, at
    a time when there was extreme need, a poor German missionary,
    just embarking for a heathen land, gave six pounds ten
    shillings, being his all.

    The following event came to his notice during his  journey:--

About October, 1837, I sent some Bibles and forty-six copies of my
Narrative to a brother in Upper Canada, who, in dependence upon the Lord
for temporal supplies, is laboring as a missionary in that country.
About eighteen months afterwards I heard that this box had not arrived.
I had reason to think that the broker had never sent off the box. My
comfort, however, was, that though this poor sinner had acted thus, yet
the Lord, in his own place and way, would use the Bibles and my
Narratives. Now, almost immediately after my arrival in Liverpool, a
brother told me that several persons wished to hear me preach who had
read my Narrative; and that he knew a considerable number had been
bought by a brother, a bookseller, from pawnbrokers, and sold again; and
that some also had been ordered from London when there were no more to
be had otherwise. It was thus evident that the ship-broker pawned these
Narratives before he absconded; but the Lord used them as I had hoped.

Aug. 1. A few days since a brother was staying with me, on his way to
his father, whom he had not seen for above two years, and who was
greatly opposed to him, on account of the decided steps which his son
had taken for the Lord. Before this brother left, that precious promise
of our Lord was brought to my mind: "If two of you shall agree on earth
as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. xviii. 19.) Accordingly, I went to
the brother's room, and having agreed to pray about a kind reception
from his father, and the conversion of both parents, we prayed together.
To-day this brother returned. The Lord has answered already one part of
the prayer. The brother was most kindly received, contrary to all
natural expectation. May the Lord now help us both to look for an answer
to the other part of our prayer! There is nothing too hard for the Lord!

Since the publication of the last edition, the father of this brother
died. He lived above ten years after Aug. 1, 1840, until he was about
eighty-six years of age, and as he continued a life of much sin and
opposition to the truth, the prospect with reference to his conversion
became darker and darker. But at last the Lord answered prayer. This
aged sinner was entirely changed, simply rested on the Lord Jesus for
the salvation of his soul, and became as much attached to his believing
son as before he had been opposed to him, and wished to have him about
him as much as possible, that he might read the Holy Scriptures to him
and pray with him.

Aug. 8. Saturday. This evening I was meditating on the fourth Psalm. The
words in verse three, "But know that the Lord has set apart him that is
godly for himself; the Lord will hear when I call upon him," I was
enabled to apply to myself, and they led me to prayer for spiritual
blessings. Whilst in prayer, the need of the orphans, there being now
again not one penny in hand, was also brought to my mind, and I asked
the Lord respecting this likewise. _About five minutes afterwards_ I was
informed that a sister wished to see me. She brought one pound ten
shillings for the orphans. Thus the Lord has already kindly sent a
little to begin the week with. There was also still further given
to-day, one shilling elevenpence; and five shillings one penny was taken
out of the boxes in the Orphan Houses.

Aug. 15. There was to-day the greatest poverty in all the three houses;
all the stores were very low, as the income throughout the week had been
so small. In addition to this it was Saturday, when the wants are nearly
double in comparison with other days. At least three pounds was needed
to help us comfortably through the day; but there was nothing towards
this in hand. My only hope was in God. The very necessity led me to
expect help for this day; for if none had come, the Lord's name would
have been dishonored. Between twelve and one, two sisters in the Lord
called on me; and the one gave me two pounds, and the other seven
shillings sixpence for the orphans. With this I went to the Boys' Orphan
House about one o'clock, where I found the children at dinner. Brother
B. put the following note into my hand, which he was just going to send
off:--

"DEAR BROTHER,--With potatoes from the children's garden, and with
apples from the tree in the playground (which apples were used for
apple-dumplings), and four shillings sixpence, the price of some
articles given by one of the laborers, we have a dinner. There is much
needed. But the Lord has provided and will provide."

August 23. Lord's day. As we have often found it to be the case, so it
is again now. After the Lord has tried our faith, he, in the love of his
heart, gives us an abundance, to show that not in anger, but for the
glory of his name, and for the trial of our faith, he has allowed us to
be poor. The Lord has kindly given to-day twelve pounds seventeen
shillings.

August 29. For many weeks past very little has come in for the other
funds. The chief supply has been by the sale of Bibles. Last Saturday I
was not able to pay the whole of the weekly salaries of the teachers in
the day schools, which, however, does not make me a debtor to them, as
it is _an understood thing_ that they have not to look to me for
payment, but to the Lord. To-day again only two shillings was in hand,
whilst several pounds were needed to pay the salaries. It appeared now
plainly to be the will of the Lord that, as all the laborers in the
Orphan Houses know about the state of the funds, so the brethren and
sisters who labor in the day schools should share the trial of faith and
the joy of faith with us. Accordingly we all met, and after I had laid
on their hearts the importance of keeping to themselves, for the Lord's
sake, the state of the funds, we prayed together.

September 5. Saturday. Because there had come in so little during the
last days, at least three pounds was requisite to supply the need of
to-day. There was, however, not one penny in hand when the day
commenced. Last evening, the laborers in the Orphan Houses, together
with the teachers of the day schools, met for prayer. This morning, one
of the teachers, who had a little money of his own, brought one pound
five shillings sixpence. Thus we were enabled to provide for the dinner.
In the afternoon all of us met again for prayer. Another teacher of the
day schools gave two shillings sixpence, and one shilling came in
besides. But all this was not enough. There was no dinner provided for
to-morrow, nor was there any money to take in milk to-morrow, and
besides this a number of other little things were to be purchased, that
there might be no real want of anything. Now observe how our kind Father
helped us! Between seven and eight this evening, a sister, whose heart
the Lord has made willing to take on her the service of disposing of the
articles which are sent for sale, brought two pounds ten shillings
sixpence, for some of the things which came a fortnight ago from
Worcester, and last Wednesday from Leeds. The sister stated, that though
she did not feel at all well, she had come because she had it so laid on
her heart that she could not stay away.

September 8. How kindly has the Lord so ordered it that for some time
past the income for the school fund should have been so little, in order
that thus we might be constrained to let the laborers in the day schools
share our joys and our trials of faith, which had been before kept from
them! But as above two years ago the Lord ordered it so that it became
needful to communicate to the laborers in the Orphan Houses the state of
the funds, and made it a blessing to them, so that I am now able to
leave Bristol, and yet the work goes on, so, I doubt not, the brethren
and sisters who are teachers in the day schools will be greatly blessed
by being thus partakers of our precious secret respecting the state of
the funds. Our prayer meetings have been already a blessing to us, and
united us more than ever in the work. We have them now every morning at
seven, and we shall continue them, the Lord helping us, till we see his
hand stretched forth, not merely in giving us means for the teachers,
but also for other purposes; for we need a stove in one of the
school-rooms, a fresh supply of several kinds of Bibles and New
Testaments, and it is desirable to have means to help missionary
brethren who labor in dependence upon the Lord for the supply of their
temporal necessities.

September 21. To-day a brother from the neighborhood of London gave me
ten pounds, to be laid out as it might be most needed. As we have been
praying many days for the school, Bible, and missionary funds, I took it
all for them. This brother knew nothing about our work, when he came
three days since to Bristol. Thus the Lord, to show his continual care
over us, raises up new helpers. They that trust in the Lord shall never
be confounded. Some who helped for a while may fall asleep in Jesus;
others may grow cold in the service of the Lord; others may be as
desirous as ever to help, but have no longer the means; others may have
both a willing heart to help, and have also the means, but may see it
the Lord's will to lay them out in another way;--and thus, from one
cause or another, were we to lean upon man, we should surely be
confounded; but, in leaning upon the living God alone, we are BEYOND
_disappointment_, and BEYOND _being forsaken because of death_, or _want
of means_, or _want of love_, or _because of the claims of other work_.

October 7. It is now five weeks since we have daily met for prayer. Not
indeed merely to ask for means, but for grace and wisdom for ourselves
in reference to the work, for the conversion of the children under our
care, for grace for those children who stand already on the Lord's side,
for a blessing upon the circulation of the Scriptures, for a blessing
upon the work with reference to the church at large, etc. But whilst we
thus, as the Spirit led us, prayed for various things, nevertheless, the
lack of means was that which had brought us day after day together. We
asked the Lord to give us the means which are needed for carrying on the
day schools, for buying Bibles, as several sorts are needed, and to
enable us to assist missionary work in foreign countries. Never at any
previous time, since first the work commenced on March 5, 1834, have we
had to continue so long a time in prayer for these funds, without
obtaining the answer. The Lord, however, gave us grace to "continue in
prayer," and kept our hearts in the assurance that he would help. Now,
though he delayed long, before he sent us the answer, in his own time he
made it manifest that he had not only not shut his ear against our
prayers in anger, but that he had answered them _even before we called_;
for there was sent to-day, from the East Indies, a bank order for one
hundred pounds, which had been sent off two months since, therefore
several days _before we even began_ to pray. It was left to me to apply
this money as it might be needed. As we had so long and so particularly
prayed for these funds, I took the whole of it for them, and not for the
orphan fund.

October 26. Yesterday morning, when I took my hat from the rail, I found
in one of my gloves a note containing a five-pound note, and the
following words: "Two pounds for the orphans, the rest for dear brother
and sister Müller." There came in still further yesterday two pounds
twelve shillings sixpence. Thus we are again supplied for about three
days.

In reference to the note which was put into my hat, containing five
pounds, I just add, that I had repeatedly asked the Lord for means for
our own personal expenses, previous to the reception of it, as we had
but very little money for ourselves. Indeed, the very moment before I
took my hat from the rail, I had risen from my knees, having again asked
the Lord for means for ourselves and for the orphans.

November 8. I purposed to have gone to Trowbridge yesterday, and had
settled it so on Friday evening with brother ----. But no sooner had I
decided to do so, than I felt no peace in the prospect of going. After
having prayed about it on Friday evening and yesterday morning, I
determined not to go, and I felt sure the Lord had some reason for not
allowing me to feel happy in the prospect of going. I began now to look
out for blessings for this day, considering that the Lord had kept me
here for good to some souls. This evening I was especially led to press
the truth on the consciences of the unconverted, entreating and
beseeching them, and telling them also that I felt sure the Lord had, in
mercy to some of them, kept me from going to Trowbridge. I spoke on
Genesis vi. 1-5. Immediately after, I saw fruit of the word. An
individual fully opened his heart to me. I walked about with him till
about ten o'clock, even as long as I had any strength left. [About ten
days afterwards, a brother told me of a poor drunkard who heard me that
evening, and who since then had stayed up till about twelve o'clock
every night to read the Scriptures, and who had not been intoxicated
since.]

At the close of these details, with reference to the year from December
9, 1839, to December 9, 1840, I make a few remarks.

1. Though our trials of faith during this year also have been many, and
recurring more frequently than during any previous year, and though we
have been often reduced to the greatest extremity, _yet the orphans have
lacked nothing_; for they always have had good nourishing food, and the
necessary articles of clothing, etc.

2. Should it be supposed by any one, in reading the plain details of
our trials of faith during this year, that on account of them we have
been disappointed in our expectations, or are discouraged in the work,
my answer is, that the very reverse is the fact. Such days were expected
from the commencement of the work; nay, more than this, the chief end
for which the Institution was established is, that the church of Christ
at large might be benefited by seeing manifestly the hand of God
stretched out on our behalf in the hour of need, in answer to prayer.
Our desire, therefore, is, not that we may be without trials of faith,
but that the Lord graciously would be pleased to support us in the
trial, that we may not dishonor him by distrust.

3. This way of living brings the Lord remarkably near. He is, as it
were, morning by morning inspecting our stores, that accordingly he may
send help. Greater and more manifest nearness of the Lord's presence I
have never had than when after breakfast there were no means for dinner,
and then the Lord provided the dinner for more than one hundred persons;
or when, after dinner, there were no means for the tea, and yet the Lord
provided the tea; and all this without one single human being having
been informed about our need. This moreover I add, that although we who
have been eyewitnesses of these gracious interpositions of our Father,
have not been so benefited by them as we might and ought to have been,
yet we have in some measure derived blessings from them. One thing is
certain, that we are not tired of doing the Lord's work in this way.

4. It has been more than once observed, that such a way of living must
lead the mind continually to think whence food, clothes, etc., are to
come, and so unfit for spiritual exercises. Now, in the first place, I
answer that our minds are very little tried about the necessaries of
life, just because the care respecting them is laid upon our Father,
who, because we are his children, _not only allows_ us to do so, _but
will have_ us to do so. Secondly, it must be remembered, that, even if
our minds were much tried about the supplies for the children, and the
means for the other work, yet, because we look to the Lord _alone_ for
these things, we should only be brought, by our sense of need, into the
presence of our Father for the supply of it; and that is a blessing, and
no injury to the soul. Thirdly, our souls realize that for the glory of
God, and for the benefit of the church at large it is that we have these
trials of faith, and that leads again to God, to ask him for fresh
supplies of grace, to be enabled to be faithful in this service.

5. My heart's desire and prayer to God is, that all believers who read
this may by these many answers to prayer be encouraged to pray,
particularly as it regards the conversion of their friends and
relations, their own state of heart, the state of the church at large,
and the success of the preaching of the gospel. Do not think, dear
reader, that these things are peculiar to us, and cannot be enjoyed by
all the saints. Although every child of God is not called by the Lord to
establish schools and orphan houses, and to trust in the Lord for means
for them; yet there is nothing on the part of the Lord to hinder, why
you may not know, by experience, far more abundantly than we do now, his
willingness to answer the prayers of his children. Do but prove the
faithfulness of God. Do but carry your every want to him. Only maintain
an _upright_ heart. But if you live in sin; if you wilfully and
habitually do things respecting which you know that they are contrary
to the will of God, then you cannot expect to be heard by him. "If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me; but verily
God hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice of my prayer."
Psalm lxvi. 18, 19.

6. As it regards the children of God, who by the labor of their hands,
or in any business or profession, earn their bread, particularly the
poorer classes of them, I give my affectionate yet solemn advice to
carry into practice the principles on which this Institution is
conducted as it regards not going into debt. Are you in debt? then make
confession of sin respecting it. Sincerely confess to the Lord that you
have sinned against Rom. xiii. 8. And if you are resolved no more to
contract debt, whatever may be the result, and you are waiting on the
Lord and truly trust in him, your present debts will soon be paid. Are
you out of debt? then, whatever your future want may be, be resolved, in
the strength of Jesus, rather to suffer the greatest privation, whilst
waiting upon God for help, than to use unscriptural means, such as
borrowing, taking goods on credit, etc., to deliver yourselves. This way
needs but to be tried, in order that its excellency may be enjoyed.

There are a few points more which may be of interest to the believing
reader, which I shall now add.

1. There have been, during this year, six day schools for poor children
_entirely_ supported by the funds of our Institution, all of which have
been established by us.

The number of all the children that have had schooling in the day
schools through the medium of the Institution, since its formation,
amounts to 2,216; the number of those at present in the six day schools
is 303.

These day schools have defrayed, by the payments of the children, about
the sixth part of their own expenses.

2. There is one Sunday school entirely supported by the funds of the
Institution.

3. There has been, since the formation of the Institution, one adult
school connected with it, in which, on the Lord's day afternoons, since
that time, about 150 adults have been instructed.

4. The number of Bibles and Testaments which have been circulated
through the medium of our Institution, during the last year, amounts to
452 copies.

There have been circulated since March 5, 1834, 6,044 copies of the
Scriptures.

5. There have been laid out, during the last year, of the funds of the
Institution, £120, 10s. 2d. for missionary purposes.

6. There are at present ninety-one orphans in the three houses. The
total number of the orphans who have been under our care from April 11,
1836, to December 9, 1840, amounts to 129.

_Without any one having been asked for anything by us_, the sum of
£3,937, 1s. 1d. has been given to us for the Orphan Houses, _as the
result of prayer to God_, since the commencement of the work.


THE BLESSING OF THE LORD UPON THE WORK IN REFERENCE
TO THE SOULS OF THE CHILDREN.

1. During the last fourteen months there have been meetings purposely
for children, at which the Scriptures have been expounded to them. At
these meetings an almost universal attention is manifested by them,
which I thankfully ascribe to the Lord, and upon which I look as a
forerunner of greater blessing.

2. During the last year three of the Sunday-school children have been
received into fellowship.

3. At the end of last year there had been eight orphans received into
communion; during the present year fourteen have been received; in all,
twenty-two.

It was stated in the last year's Report that we were looking for fruit
upon our labors as it regards the conversion of the children, as the
Lord had given to us a measure of earnestness in praying for them. The
Lord has dealt with us according to our expectations. But I expect far
more than what we have seen. While the chief object of our work has been
and is still the manifestation of the heart of God towards his children,
and the reality of power with God in prayer, yet, as we hoped, and as
it has been our prayer, the Lord gives to us also the joy of seeing one
child after another brought to stand openly on the Lord's side. As far
as my experience goes, it appears to me that believers generally have
expected far too little of _present_ fruit upon their labors among
children. There has been a hoping that the Lord some day or other would
own the instruction which they give to children, and would answer at
some time or other, though after many years only, the prayers which they
offer up on their behalf. Now, while such passages as Proverbs xxii. 6,
Ecclesiastes xi. 1, Galatians vi. 9, 1 Cor. xv. 58, give unto us
assurance not merely respecting everything which we do for the Lord, in
general, but also respecting bringing up children in the fear of the
Lord, in particular, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; yet we
have to guard against abusing such passages, by thinking it a matter of
little moment whether we see _present_ fruit or not; but, on the
contrary, we should give the Lord no rest till we see present fruit, and
therefore in persevering yet submissive prayer we should make known our
requests unto God. I add, as an encouragement to believers who labor
among children, that during the last two years seventeen other young
persons or children, from the age of eleven and a half to seventeen,
have been received into fellowship among us, and that I am looking out
now for many more to be converted, and that not merely of the orphans,
but of the Sunday and day school children. As in so many respects we
live in remarkable times, so in this respect also, that the Lord is
working greatly among the children in many places.

The total of the expenses connected with the objects of the Institution,
exclusive of the Orphan Houses, from November 19, 1839, to November 19,
1840, is £622, 2s. 6½d. The balance in hand on Nov. 19, 1840, was
£13, 2s. 9¾d.

The total of the expenses connected with the three Orphan Houses, from
December 9, 1839, to December 9, 1840, is £900, 11s. 2½d. The balance
in hand on December 9, 1840, was £15, 1s. 6¼d.


REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1840.

1. As to the church. There are 525 at present in communion; 114 have
been added during the past year, of whom 47 have been brought to the
knowledge of the Lord among us.

2. As to the supply of my temporal necessities. The Lord has been
pleased to send me, by the freewill offerings of the saints, £242,
8s. 11½.[17]

  [Footnote 17: It may not be improper to state here that the little
  patrimony to which Mr. Müller became entitled upon the decease of
  his father was devoted to the purposes of charity and religion, in
  accordance with the principle of action indicated on page 67. This
  fact is not mentioned by Mr. M., but has come to the knowledge of
  the editor through another channel.--ED.]




CHAPTER XIII.

FAITH STRENGTHENED BY EXERCISE.

1841.

    A WANT SUPPLIED--RESOURCES EXCEEDING THE DEMAND--EVIL OF
    SURETYSHIP--POWER OF CHRISTIAN LOVE--GOD'S WORD THE FOOD OF THE
    SOUL--PREPARATION FOR THE HOUR OF TRIAL--POVERTY--DEPENDING ONLY
    ON THE LIVING GOD.


January 1, 1841. During this week we have daily met for prayer, for the
especial purpose of asking the Lord to give us the means of having the
last year's Report printed. It is three weeks since it might have been
sent to the press. We felt this now to be a matter of especial
importance, as, if the Report were not soon printed, it would be known
that it arose from want of means. By the donations which came in during
these last days for the orphans, and by ten pounds which was given
to-day for the other funds, we have the means of defraying the expense
of about two thirds of the printing, and therefore a part of the
manuscript was sent off, trusting that the Lord would be pleased to send
in more means before two sheets are printed off; but if not, we should
then stop till we have more. _Evening._ There came in still further five
pounds; also, ten shillings and three shillings.

Jan. 11. Monday. During the last week the Lord not only supplied us
richly with all we needed for the orphans, but enabled us to put by
several pounds towards printing the Report. On Saturday evening there
was only three shillings sixpence left. On this account I was looking
out for answers to my prayers for means, and the Lord did not disappoint
me. There came in altogether yesterday nine pounds sixteen shillings
fourpence. We have now enough even for the last part of the Report.

Jan. 12. To-day I have received a letter from a brother, in which he
empowers me to draw upon his bankers, during this year, to the amount of
one thousand pounds, for any brethren who have it in their hearts to
give themselves to missionary service in the East Indies, and whom I
shall consider called for this service, as far as I am able to judge.
[This power lasted only for that year; but no brethren who seemed to be
suitable offered themselves for this service. This is another fresh
proof how much more easily pecuniary means can be obtained than suitable
individuals. Indeed, in all my experience I have found it thus, that if
I could only settle that a certain thing to be done was according to the
will of God, the means were soon obtained to carry it into effect.]

Jan. 13. This evening I was called to the house of a brother and sister
who are in the deepest distress. The brother had become surety for the
debts of his son, not in the least expecting that he ever should be
called upon for the payment of them; but, as his son has not discharged
his debts, the father has been called upon to do so; and except the
money is paid within a few days, he will be imprisoned.

How precious it is, even for this life, to act according to the word of
God! This perfect revelation of his mind gives us directions for
everything, even the most minute affairs of this life. It commands us,
"Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties
for debts." Prov. xxii. 26. The way in which Satan ensnares persons, to
bring them into the net, and to bring trouble upon them by becoming
sureties, is, that he seeks to represent the matter as if there were no
danger connected with that particular case, and that one might be sure
one should never be called upon to pay the money; but the Lord, the
faithful Friend, tells us in his own word that the only way "to be sure"
in such a matter is "to hate suretyship." Prov. xi. 15. The following
points seem to me of solemn moment for consideration, if I were called
upon to become surety for another: 1. What obliges the person who wishes
me to become surety for him to need a surety? Is it really a good cause
in which I am called upon to become surety? I do not remember ever to
have met with a case in which in a plain, and godly, and in all respects
scriptural matter such a thing occurred. There was generally some sin or
other connected with it. 2. If I become surety, notwithstanding what the
Lord has said to me in his word, am I in such a position that no one
will be injured by my being called upon to fulfil the engagements of the
person for whom I am going to be surety? In most instances this alone
ought to keep one from it. 3. If still I become surety, the amount of
money for which I become responsible must be so in my power that I am
able to produce it whenever it is called for, in order that the name of
the Lord may not be dishonored. 4. But if there be the possibility of
having to fulfil the engagements of the person in whose stead I have to
stand, is it the will of the Lord that I should spend my means in that
way? Is it not rather his will that my means should be spent in another
way? 5. How can I get over the plain word of the Lord, which is to the
contrary, even if the first four points could be satisfactorily settled?

March 4. From February 22 up to this day our necessities in the day
schools were supplied by thirteen small donations, and by a donation of
eight pounds from Q. Q. To-day I received fifteen pounds. When this
arrived there was not one penny in hand for the day schools, whilst two
days after about seven pounds was needed. This money came from a
considerable distance, and from a brother who never had assisted in this
work before, whereby the Lord afresh shows how easily he can raise up
new helpers.

For the encouragement of believers, who are tried by having unconverted
relatives and friends, I will relate the following circumstance, the
truth of which I know.

Baron Von K., who resided in my own country, the kingdom of Prussia, had
been for many years a disciple of the Lord Jesus. Even about the
commencement of this century, when there was almost universal darkness
or even open infidelity spread over the whole continent of Europe, he
knew the Lord Jesus; and when, about the year 1806, there was the
greatest distress in Silesia among many thousands of weavers, this
blessed man of God took the following gracious step for his Lord and
Master. As the weavers had no employment, the whole continent almost
being in an unsettled state on account of Napoleon's career, it seemed
to him the will of the Lord that he should use his very considerable
property to furnish these poor weavers with work, in order to save them
from the greatest state of destitution, though in doing this there was
not only no prospect of gain, but the certain prospect of immense loss.
He therefore found employment for about six thousand weavers. But he was
not content with this. Whilst he gave the bread which perishes, he also
sought to minister to the souls of these weavers. To that end he sought
to set believers as overseers over this immense weaving concern, and not
only saw to it that the weavers were instructed in spiritual things, but
he himself also set the truth before them. Thus it went on for a good
while, till at last, on account of the loss of the chief part of his
property, he was obliged to think about giving it up. But by this time
this precious act of mercy had so commended itself to the government
that it was taken up by them and carried on till the times altered.
Baron von K. was, however, appointed director of the whole concern as
long as it existed.

This dear man of God was not content with this. He travelled through
many countries to visit the prisons, for the sake of improving the
temporal and spiritual condition of the prisoners, and among all the
other things which he sought to do for the Lord was this also in
particular: He assisted poor students whilst at the university of
Berlin, especially those who studied divinity, as it is called, in order
to get access to them, and to win them for the Lord. One day a most
talented young man, whose father lived at Breslau, where there is
likewise a university, heard of the aged baron's kindness to students,
and he therefore wrote to him, requesting him to assist him, as his own
father could not well afford to support him any longer, having other
children to provide for. A short time afterwards young T. received a
most kind reply from the baron, inviting him to come to Berlin; but,
before this letter arrived, the young student had heard that Baron von
K. was a pietist or mystic, as true believers are contemptuously called
in Germany; and as young T. was of a highly philosophical turn of mind,
reasoning about everything, questioning the truth of revelation, yea,
questioning, most sceptically, the existence of God, he much disliked
the prospect of going to the old baron. Still, he thought he could but
try, and if he did not like it, he was not bound to remain in connection
with him. He arrived in Berlin on a day when there was a great review of
the troops, and, being full of this, he began to speak about it to the
steward of the baron. The steward, however, being a believer, turned the
conversation, before the young student was aware of it, to spiritual
things; and yet he could not say that it had been forced. He began
another subject, and a third, but still it always came presently again
to spiritual things.

At last the baron came, who received young T. in the most affectionate
and familiar manner, as if he had been his equal, and as if young T.
bestowed a favor on him, rather than that he was favored by the baron.
The baron offered him a room in his own house, and a place at his own
table, while he should be studying in Berlin, which young T. accepted.
He now sought in every way to treat the young student in the most kind
and affectionate way, and as much as possible to serve him, and to show
him the power of the gospel in his own life, without arguing with him,
yea, without speaking to him directly about his soul. For, discovering
in young T. a most reasoning and sceptical mind, he avoided in every
possible way getting into any argument with him, while the young student
again and again said to himself, "I wish I could get into an argument
with this old fool; I would show him his folly." But the baron avoided
it. When the young student used to come home in the evening, and the
baron heard him come, he would himself go to meet him on entering the
house, would light his candle, would assist and serve him, in any way he
could, even to the fetching the bootjack for him, and helping him to
take off his boots. Thus this lowly aged disciple went on for some time,
whilst the young student still sought an opportunity for arguing with
him, but wondered nevertheless how the baron could thus serve him. One
evening, on the return of young T. to the baron's house, when the baron
was making himself his servant as usual, he could refrain himself no
longer, but burst out thus: "Baron, how can you do all this? You see I
do not care about you, and how are you able to continue to be so kind to
me, and thus to serve me?" The baron replied, "My dear young friend, I
have learned it from the Lord Jesus. I wish you would read through the
Gospel of John. Good night." The student now for the first time in his
life sat down and read the word of God in a disposition of mind to be
willing to learn, whilst up to that time he had never read the Holy
Scriptures but with the view of wishing to find out arguments against
them. It pleased God to bless him. From that time he became himself a
follower of the Lord Jesus, and has been so ever since.

May 7. It has recently pleased the Lord to teach me a truth,
irrespective of human instrumentality, as far as I know, the benefit of
which I have not lost, though now, while preparing the fifth edition for
the press, more than fourteen years have since passed away. The point is
this: I saw more clearly than ever that the first great and primary
business to which I ought to attend every day was, to have my soul happy
in the Lord. The first thing to be concerned about was not how much I
might serve the Lord, how I might glorify the Lord; but how I might get
my soul into a happy state, and how my inner man might be nourished. For
I might seek to set the truth before the unconverted, I might seek to
benefit believers, I might seek to relieve the distressed, I might in
other ways seek to behave myself as it becomes a child of God in this
world; and yet, not being happy in the Lord, and not being nourished and
strengthened in my inner man day by day, all this might not be attended
to in a right spirit. Before this time my practice had been, at least
for ten years previously, as an habitual thing to give myself to prayer,
after having dressed myself in the morning. Now, I saw that the most
important thing I had to do was to give myself to the reading of the
word of God, and to meditation on it, that thus my heart might be
comforted, encouraged, warned, reproved, instructed; and that thus, by
means of the word of God, whilst meditating on it, my heart might be
brought into experimental communion with the Lord.

I began therefore to meditate on the New Testament from the beginning,
early in the morning. The first thing I did, after having asked in a few
words the Lord's blessing upon his precious word, was, to begin to
meditate on the word of God, searching as it were into every verse, to
get blessing out of it; not for the sake of the public ministry of the
word, not for the sake of preaching on what I had meditated upon, but
for the sake of obtaining food for my own soul. The result I have found
to be almost invariably this, that after a very few minutes my soul has
been led to confession, or to thanksgiving, or to intercession, or to
supplication; so that, though I did not, as it were, give myself to
_prayer_, but to _meditation_, yet it turned almost immediately more or
less into prayer. When thus I have been for a while making confession,
or intercession, or supplication, or have given thanks, I go on to the
next words or verse, turning all, as I go on, into prayer for myself or
others, as the word may lead to it, but still continually keeping before
me that food for my own soul is the object of my meditation. The result
of this is, that there is always a good deal of confession,
thanksgiving, supplication, or intercession mingled with my meditation,
and that my inner man almost invariably is even sensibly nourished and
strengthened, and that by breakfast time, with rare exceptions, I am in
a peaceful if not happy state of heart. Thus also the Lord is pleased to
communicate unto me that which, either very soon after or at a later
time, I have found to become food for other believers, though it was not
for the sake of the public ministry of the word that I gave myself to
meditation, but for the profit of my own inner man.

With this mode I have likewise combined the being out in the open air
for an hour, an hour and a half, or two hours, before breakfast, walking
about in the fields, and in the summer sitting for a little on the
stiles, if I find it too much to walk all the time. I find it very
beneficial to my health to walk thus for meditation before breakfast,
and am now so in the habit of using the time for that purpose, that when
I get into the open air I generally take out a New Testament of
good-sized type, which I carry with me for that purpose, besides my
Bible; and I find that I can profitably spend my time in the open air,
which formerly was not the case, for want of habit. I used to consider
the time spent in walking a loss, but now I find it very profitable, not
only to my body, but also to my soul. The walking out before breakfast
is of course not necessarily connected with this matter, and every one
has to judge according to his strength and other circumstances.

The difference, then, between my former practice and my present one is
this: Formerly, when I rose, I began to pray as soon as possible, and
generally spent all my time till breakfast in prayer, or almost all the
time. At all events I almost invariably began with prayer, except when I
felt my soul to be more than usually barren, in which case I read the
word of God for food, or for refreshment, or for a revival and renewal
of my inner man, before I gave myself to prayer. But what was the
result? I often spent a quarter of an hour, or half an hour, or even an
hour, on my knees, before being conscious to myself of having derived
comfort, encouragement, humbling of soul, etc.; and often, after having
suffered much from wandering of mind for the first ten minutes, or a
quarter of an hour, or even half an hour, I only then began _really to
pray_. I scarcely ever suffer now in this way. For my heart being
nourished by the truth, being brought into _experimental_ fellowship
with God, I speak to my Father and to my Friend (vile though I am, and
unworthy of it) about the things that he has brought before me in his
precious word. It often now astonishes me that I did not sooner see this
point. In no book did I ever read about it. No public ministry ever
brought the matter before me. No private intercourse with a brother
stirred me up to this matter. And yet now, since God has taught me this
point, it is as plain to me as anything, that the first thing the child
of God has to do morning by morning is, to _obtain food for his inner
man_. As the outward man is not fit for work for any length of time
except we take food, and as this is one of the first things we do in the
morning, so it should be with the inner man. We should take food for
that, as every one must allow. Now what is the food for the inner man?
Not _prayer_, but _the word of God_; and here again, not the simple
reading of the word of God, so that it only passes through our minds,
just as water runs through a pipe, but considering what we read,
pondering over it, and applying it to our hearts. When we pray, we speak
to God. Now, prayer, in order to be continued for any length of time in
any other than a formal manner, requires, generally speaking, a measure
of strength or godly desire, and the season, therefore, when this
exercise of the soul can be most effectually performed is after the
inner man has been nourished by meditation on the word of God, where we
find our Father speaking to us, to encourage us, to comfort us, to
instruct us, to humble us, to reprove us. We may therefore profitably
meditate, with God's blessing, though we are ever so weak spiritually;
nay, the weaker we are, the more we need meditation for the
strengthening of our inner man. There is thus far less to be feared from
wandering of mind than if we give ourselves to prayer without having had
previously time for meditation. I dwell so particularly on this point
because of the immense spiritual profit and refreshment I am conscious
of having derived from it myself, and I affectionately and solemnly
beseech all my fellow-believers to ponder this matter. By the blessing
of God I ascribe to this mode the help and strength which I have had
from God to pass in peace through deeper trials, in various ways, than I
had ever had before; and after having now above fourteen years tried
this way, I can most fully, in the fear of God, commend it. In addition
to this I generally read, after family prayer, larger portions of the
word of God, when I still pursue my practice of reading regularly onward
in the Holy Scriptures, sometimes in the New Testament and sometimes in
the Old, and for more than twenty-six years I have proved the
blessedness of it. I take, also, either then or at other parts of the
day, time more especially for prayer.

How different, when the soul is refreshed and made happy early in the
morning, from what it is when, without spiritual preparation, the
service, the trials, and the temptations of the day come upon one!

Oct. 1. When I had again not one penny in hand for the necessities of
this day, there was brought to me this morning ten shillings for the
orphans, which had been sent from Kensington. In the paper which
contained the money, was written: "_Your Heavenly Father_ knoweth that
ye have need of _these_ things." "Trust in the Lord." This word of our
Lord is to me of more value than many bank notes. About five minutes
later I received from an Irish sister ten pounds, through her banker in
London. I mention here, as a point particularly to be noticed, that
after the season of comparative abundance had come to an end in
September, the Lord did not _at once_ allow us to be so sharply tried as
we were afterwards. He dealt in the same gentle way with us three years
before, when the trials of faith in this part of the work first
commenced.

Nov. 2. At a time of the greatest poverty one pound was sent by a lady
from Birmingham. About half an hour afterwards I received ten pounds
from a brother who had saved up one hundred and fifty pounds, and put it
into a savings bank, but who now sees that to devote this money to the
promotion of the work of God tends more to the glory of the name of
Jesus than to retain it in the savings bank upon interest for a time of
sickness or old age; for he is assured that should such times come, the
same Lord, who has hitherto cared for him whilst in health and strength
and able to work, will also care for him then. The same brother gave me
three pounds a fortnight since. This ten pounds came in very seasonably;
for, though we had been able to provide for the absolute necessities of
to-day, yet there was want in many respects, especially as a boy is just
going out as an apprentice, who needs tools and an outfit.

Nov. 13. Saturday. This morning I took one shilling out of the box in my
house. This shilling was all there was towards the need of to-day.
Pause, dear reader, for a few moments! Consider that there are more than
a hundred persons to be provided with everything they require; consider
that there is no money in hand; and consider also that this is the case
not once nor twice in the course of the year, but very frequently. Is it
not precious, under such circumstances, to have the living God as a
father to go to, who is ever able and ever willing to help, as it may be
really needed? And to this privilege every one has a title who believes
in the Lord Jesus, being as such a child of God. Galatians iii. 26. For
though all believers in the Lord Jesus are not called upon to establish
orphan houses, schools for poor children, etc., and trust in God for
means; yet all believers, according to the will of God concerning them
in Christ Jesus, may cast, and ought to cast, all their care upon him
who careth for them, and need not be anxiously concerned about anything,
as is plainly to be seen from 1 Peter v. 7, Philippians iv. 6, Matthew
vi. 25-34. Under these circumstances of need, a silver watch, which
_only yesterday afternoon_ had become the property of the orphan fund,
was disposed of, whereby we were helped through the expenses of to-day.
The coals are almost gone in each of the houses. Every article of
provision, etc., is likewise much reduced. Truly, we are exceedingly
poor; nevertheless there are the necessary provisions till Monday
morning, and thus we are brought to the close of another week. This
afternoon all the laborers met for prayer.

Nov. 14. When we met again this afternoon for prayer, we had reason to
praise, for the Lord had sent in means. This morning was given to me
five pounds, and six shillings had come in by sale of articles.

Nov. 15. Last Friday brother Craik and I had a meeting for inquirers and
candidates for fellowship. We saw eight, and had to send away ten whom
we could not see, our strength being quite gone after we had seen the
eight, one after another. This evening we saw seven, and had to send
away three.

Nov. 16. The last four days we have daily met for prayer, there being no
means to pay the teachers in the day schools. Besides this, we need a
stove in one of the school-rooms; also some Bibles and tracts. To-day I
received two pounds from a brother at Exmouth.

Dec. 9. We are now brought to the close of the sixth year of this part
of the work, _having only in hand the money which has been put by for
the rent_; but during the whole of this year we have been supplied with
all that was needed.

During the last three years we had closed the accounts on this day, and
had, a few days after, some public meetings, at which, for the benefit
of the hearers, we stated how the Lord had dealt with us during the
year, and the substance of what had been stated at those meetings was
afterwards printed for the benefit of the church at large. This time,
however, it appeared to us better to delay for a while both the public
meetings and the publishing of the Report. Through grace we had learned
to lean upon the Lord only, being assured that if we never were to speak
or write one single word more about this work, yet should we be supplied
with means, as long as he should enable us to depend on himself alone.
But whilst we neither had had those public meetings for the purpose of
exposing our necessity, nor had had the account of the Lord's dealings
with us published for the sake of working thereby upon the feelings of
the readers, and thus inducing them to give money, but only that we
might by our experience benefit other saints; yet it might have appeared
to some that in making known our circumstances we were actuated by some
such motives. What better proof, therefore, could we give of our
depending upon the living God alone, and not upon public meetings or
printed reports, than that, _in the midst of our deep poverty_, instead
of being glad for the time to have come when we could make known our
circumstances, we still went on quietly for some time longer, without
saying anything. We therefore determined, as we sought and still seek in
this work to act for the profit of the saints generally, to delay both
the public meetings and the Reports for a few months. _Naturally_ we
should have been, of course, as glad as any one to have exposed our
poverty at that time; but _spiritually_ we were enabled to delight even
then in the prospect of the increased benefit that might be derived by
the church at large from our acting as we did.




CHAPTER XIV.

WALKING IN DARKNESS.

1841-1842.

    "GOD'S WAY LEADS INTO TRIAL"--GROUNDS OF
    THANKFULNESS--PROTRACTED DARKNESS--CAST DOWN, BUT NOT
    DESTROYED--TRUST IN GOD COMMENDED--THE MEANS OF ITS
    ATTAINMENT--REVIEW OF THE WORK.


December 15, 1841. From Nov. 12 to this day my fellow-laborers in the
church and I have seen thirty inquirers and candidates for fellowship,
and some of them we have seen repeatedly. How can we sufficiently praise
the Lord for still continuing to use us in his service?

Dec. 18. Saturday morning. There is now the greatest need, and only
fourpence in hand, which I found in the box at my house; yet I fully
believe the Lord will supply us this day also with all that is
required.--Pause a few moments, dear reader. Observe two things. We
acted _for God_ in delaying the public meetings and the publishing of
the Report; but _God's way leads always into trial, so far as sight and
sense are concerned_. _Nature_ always will be tried _in God's ways_. The
Lord was saying by this poverty, "I will now see whether you truly lean
upon me, and whether you truly look to me." Of all the seasons that I
had ever passed through since I had been living in this way, _up to that
time_, I never knew any period in which my faith was tried so sharply
as during the four months from December 12, 1841, to April 12, 1842. But
observe further: We might even now have altered our minds with respect
to the public meetings and publishing the Report; for _no one knew our
determination, at this time_, concerning this point. Nay, on the
contrary, we knew with what delight very many children of God were
looking forward to receive further accounts. But the Lord kept us
steadfast to the conclusion at which we arrived under his guidance.--Now
to return to Saturday, Dec. 18. _Evening._ The Lord has been very kind
to us this day. In the course of the morning six shillings came in. We
had thus, with what provisions there were in hand, all that was needed
for the dinner, but no means to provide for the next meal in the
afternoon. A few minutes after the laborers had met together for prayer
this morning, there was given to one of them a sovereign for himself. By
means of this all that was needed for tea could be procured. When we
again met in the evening for prayer, we found that the supplies amounted
to two pounds eight shillings twopence, enough for all that was required
to-day. But one thing more is to be noticed respecting this day. I was
informed that three more of the orphans have been recently brought to
the knowledge of the truth. We have now been meeting daily for prayer
during the last five weeks, and thus the Lord has not merely heard our
prayers respecting the funds, but has also blessed these children.

Dec. 23. This is now the sixth week that the laborers in the day schools
and Orphan Houses have daily met for prayer. Several precious answers we
have already received since we began to meet, as it regards pecuniary
supplies, fresh instances of conversion among the children, etc. One of
our petitions has been that the Lord would be pleased to furnish us with
means for a stove at Callowhill Street schoolroom. But, though we had
often mentioned this matter before the Lord, he seemed not to regard our
request. Yesterday afternoon, while walking in my little garden, and
meditating and praying, I had an unusual assurance that the time was now
come when the Lord would answer our request, which arose partly from my
being able _to believe_ that _he would_ send the means, and partly from
the fact that the answer could no longer be delayed without prayer
having failed in this matter, as we could not assemble the children
again, after the Christmas vacation, without there being a stove put up.
And now, dear reader, observe: This morning I received from A. B. twenty
pounds, and we have thus much more than is required for a stove.


REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1841.

1. In reading over my journal, I find that the Lord has given me, during
this year, many precious answers to prayer, in addition to those which
have been recorded in the previous part of the Narrative. I mention the
following for the encouragement of the reader: 1. One of the orphan boys
needed to be apprenticed. I knew of no suitable believing master who
would take an in-door apprentice. I gave myself to prayer, and brought
the matter daily before the Lord. I marked it down among the subjects
for which I would daily ask the Lord; and at last, though from May 21 to
September I had to pray about the matter, the Lord granted my request;
for in September I found a suitable place for him. 2. On May 23 I began
to ask the Lord that he would be pleased to deliver a certain sister in
the Lord from the great spiritual depression under which she was
suffering, and after three days the Lord granted me my request. 3. On
June 15 I began to ask the Lord to deliver a brother at a distance from
the great spiritual nervousness in which he found himself shut up,
which not only distressed him exceedingly, and in a great measure
hindered him in his service towards the world and the church, but which
in consequence was also a trial to the saints who knew and valued this
dear brother. This petition I brought many times before the Lord. The
year passed away, and it was not granted. But yet at last this request
also has been granted to me and to the many dear saints who I know
prayed for this dear brother; for though he was for some years in this
state, it is now [in 1845] two years and more since he has been quite
restored. 4. On June 15 I also began to ask the Lord daily in his mercy
to keep a sister in the Lord from insanity, who was then apparently on
the very border of it; and I have now [in 1845] to record to his praise,
after nearly four years have passed away, that the Lord has kept her
from it. 5. During this year I was informed about the conversion of one
of the very greatest sinners that I had ever heard of in all my service
for the Lord. Repeatedly I fell on my knees with his wife, and asked the
Lord for his conversion, when she came to me in the deepest distress of
soul, on account of her most barbarous and cruel treatment that she
received from him in his bitter enmity against her for the Lord's sake,
and because he could not provoke her to be in a passion, and _she would
not_ strike him again, and the like. At the time when it was at its
worst I pleaded especially on his behalf the promise in Matthew xviii.
19: "Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my
Father which is in heaven." And now this awful persecutor is converted.
6. On May 25 I began to ask the Lord for greater real spiritual
prosperity among the saints among whom I labor in Bristol than there
ever yet had been among them; and now I have to record to the praise of
the Lord that truly he has answered this request; for, considering all
things, at no period has there been more manifestation of grace, and
truth, and spiritual power among us, than there is now while I am
writing this for the press [1845].

2. The state of the church with reference to numbers. There are 572 at
present in communion, 88 having been added during the past year, of whom
30 have been brought to the knowledge of the Lord among us.

3. The Lord's goodness as to my temporal supplies during this year. He
has been pleased to give me by freewill offerings of the saints, £238,
11s. 1¾d.

January 3, 1842. This evening we had a precious public prayer meeting.
When the usual time for closing the meeting came, it appeared to me that
there was a desire to continue to wait upon the Lord. I therefore
proposed to the brethren that those who had bodily strength, time, and a
desire for waiting still longer upon the Lord, would do so. At least
thirty remained, and we continued till after ten in prayer, whilst
several brethren prayed. I never knew prayer more really in the Spirit.
I experienced for myself unusual nearness to the Lord, and was enabled
to ask in faith, nothing doubting.

Jan. 4. As we have often found it to be the case, so it is now. After a
season of more than usual poverty, comes a time of more than usual
abundance. To-day the same brother who has been spoken of under November
2, and who has drawn his money out of the savings bank to spend it for
the Lord, sent twenty pounds more of it. There came in also from
Guernsey one pound, and one pound seven shillings besides. I am now able
to order oatmeal from Scotland, buy materials for the boys' clothes,
order shoes, etc. Thus the Lord has been pleased to answer _all_ our
requests with respect to the pecuniary necessities of the orphans, which
we have brought before him in our prayer meetings during the last seven
weeks. We have thus had of late an abundance, but the expenses have
been great also; for within the last twenty-five days I have paid out
above one hundred pounds.

Feb. 5. Saturday. As only ten pounds ten shillings sixpence had been
received since January 29, _i. e._ only so much as day by day was needed
to provide necessaries for the orphans, there is again the greatest
need. It is now twelve o'clock, and there are no means as yet to meet
the expenses of to-day. The words in the prayer of Jehoshaphat, "Neither
know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee," are at this moment the
language of my heart. _I_ likewise know not what to do, but my eyes are
upon the Lord, and _I am sure that he will help this day
also_.--_Evening._ In the course of the morning came in, by sale of
articles, twelve shillings. We were able likewise to dispose of one of
the articles which were sent last evening for five shillings. This
afternoon one of the laborers gave me ten shillings, and three shillings
came in for needlework. By means of this one pound ten shillings we were
able to supply all that was needed.

Feb. 8. By what came in yesterday and the day before, the need of
yesterday was supplied, and there is enough in all the houses for the
meals of to-day; but in none of the houses have we been able to take in
any bread; and as yesterday also but little could be taken in, there
will not remain any for to-morrow; nor is there money enough to take in
milk to-morrow morning. There are likewise coals needed in two houses.
Indeed, so far as I know, these three years and seven months, since
first the funds were exhausted, we were never in greater poverty; and if
the Lord were not to send means before nine o'clock to-morrow morning,
his name would be dishonored. But I am fully assured that he will not
leave us.--_Evening._ The Lord has not yet been pleased to send us what
is needed for to-morrow, but he has given us a fresh proof that he is
mindful of us. Between four and five o'clock this afternoon were sent
nine plum cakes, which a sister had ordered to be baked as a treat for
the orphans. These cakes were an encouragement to me to continue to look
out for further supplies. There was also found in the boxes at the
Orphan Houses two shillings and a penny halfpenny, and one shilling
fourpence came in for stockings. These little donations are most
precious, but they are not enough to meet the need of to-morrow; yea,
before nine o'clock to-morrow morning we need more money to be able to
take in the milk. Truly, we are poorer than ever; but through grace my
eyes look not at the empty stores and the empty purse, but to the riches
of the Lord only.

Feb. 9. This morning I went between seven and eight o'clock to the
Orphan Houses, to see whether the Lord had sent in anything. When I
arrived there, he had just two or three minutes before sent help. A
brother, in going to his house of business this morning, had gone
already about half a mile, when the Lord was pleased to lay the orphans
upon his heart. He said, however, to himself, I cannot well return now,
but will take something this evening; and thus he walked on.
Nevertheless, he could not go on any further, but felt himself
constrained to go back, and to take to brother R. B., at the Boys'
Orphan House, three sovereigns. [The donor himself stated this to me
afterwards.] Thus the Lord in his faithfulness helped us. Help was never
more truly needed, for our poverty was never greater; nor did the help
of the Lord ever come more manifestly from himself; for _the brother was
gone on a good distance_, it was _between seven and eight o'clock in the
morning_, and it was _so short a time before money would have been
needed_. Consider this, beloved reader, and with us praise the Lord for
his goodness. Praise him particularly that he enabled us to trust in
him in this trying hour. There came in besides, to-day, seven shillings
sixpence.

Feb. 12. Saturday. Never since the funds were for the first time
exhausted had there come in less during any week than during this. We
were only able to supply the absolute necessities; but this we were
enabled to do. When the meal-times came, the Lord always provided what
was needful, and, considering the great distress there is now almost
everywhere, our dear orphans are very well provided for. Now this day
began not only without there being anything in hand, but our stores were
greatly reduced, and we had to procure provisions for two days. One of
the laborers gave five shillings in the morning, to provide the means to
take in the milk. I collected together some pamphlets, which had been
given for sale, to dispose of them, and they were sold about eleven
o'clock for four shillings. There came in also by sale of stockings
three shillings, and twelve shillings was paid on behalf of one of the
orphans. Thus we were provided with means to procure a dinner, and had a
_little_ towards purchasing bread, but by no means enough. All the
laborers were together in prayer from half-past eleven till one, and we
separated comfortably, with the purpose of meeting again in the evening.
When I came home there was given to me an old broken silver pencil-case,
which, though worth very little, I took as a fresh proof that our Father
was mindful of our need. When we met again this evening, we found that
three shillings sixpence had come in by sale of stockings, and sixpence
for two Reports. As all this was not enough, a few old and needless
articles were disposed of for four shillings, also the broken
pencil-case for sixpence. I say _needless_ articles, for other articles
it did not seem right to us to dispose of, in order that the Lord's own
deliverance might be manifest. A laborer was also still further able to
give seven shillings of his own. To one of the laborers two shillings
had been owed by a certain individual for more than a twelvemonth, which
being paid just now, and given by him for the orphans, came in most
seasonably. Thus we had one pound eighteen shillings sixpence, as much
as was needful to procure provisions till after breakfast on Monday
morning. However, the Lord helped still further. Between eight and nine
this evening, after we had been together for prayer, and had now
separated, some money was given to one of the laborers for himself, by
which means he was able to give nine shillings, so that altogether two
pounds seven shillings sixpence had come in this day. This has been, of
all the weeks, during the last three years and seven months, one of the
most trying, so far as it regards the trial of faith. Thanks to the Lord
who has helped us this day also! Thanks to him for enabling us already
this morning, when we met for prayer, to praise him for the deliverance
which we were sure he would work.

Feb. 16. This morning there was now again only sufficient money in hand
to take in milk at two of the houses; but as a laborer was able to give
six shillings sixpence, we had sufficient for the milk, and had also
enough, with the provisions that were in the houses, to provide for the
dinner. Nothing more came in in the course of the morning, nor was I
able to make inquiries how matters stood. In the afternoon, between
three and four o'clock, having once more besought the Lord to send us
help, I sat peacefully down to give myself to meditation over the word,
considering that that was now my service, though I knew not whether
there was a morsel of bread for tea in any one of the houses, _but being
assured that the Lord would provide_. For, through grace, my mind is so
fully assured of the faithfulness of the Lord, that, in the midst of the
greatest need, I am enabled in peace to go about my other work. Indeed,
did not the Lord give me this, which is the result of trusting in him,
I should scarcely be able to work at all; for it is now comparatively a
rare thing that a day comes when I am not in need for one or the other
part of the work. Scarcely had I sat down to meditate, when a note was
sent to me from the Orphan Houses, in which brother R. B., master of the
orphan boys, had written thus: "On visiting the sisters in the Infant
and Girls' Orphan Houses, I found them in the greatest need. There was
not bread in one of the houses for tea this evening, and the six
shillings sixpence was scarcely enough to supply what was needed for the
dinner. I therefore opened the box in the Boys' Orphan House, and most
unexpectedly found one pound it. Thus, through the kindness of the Lord,
we were again abundantly supplied as it regards present necessities." In
the evening the Lord, in his love and faithfulness, stretched out his
hand still further. I had expounded at the meeting a part of John xi.
The last words on which I spoke were, "Said I not unto thee that if thou
wouldest believe thou shouldest see the glory of God?" When the meeting
was over, as a fresh proof of the truth of this word, a note was given
to me in which a sick sister sent me five pounds for the orphans.

Feb. 19. Saturday. Our means were now again completely spent. Our
provision stores were, perhaps, even more exhausted than on any previous
Saturday. There was not the least human likelihood of obtaining means
for sufficient provisions for this _one_ day, and much less for _two_
days. When I went before breakfast to the Orphan Houses, I found a
letter from Nottingham, containing one shilling, which had arrived last
evening. This was not only a sweet proof that our Father remembered our
need, but it was also like an earnest that he would supply us this day
also with all we required. In the course of the morning came in by sale
of stockings four shillings elevenpence. In the box at my house I found
one shilling. One of the laborers gave four shillings tenpence. Thus we
were provided with those things which were absolutely needed for this
day. We met between eleven and twelve o'clock for prayer. When we met
again in the evening, a second letter had arrived from Nottingham, with
another shilling. This was a further sweet proof of our Father's loving
remembrance of our need; but with all this we were still without any
means to provide bread for to-morrow, the Lord's day. At eight o'clock I
separated from my fellow-laborers, as I expected brother R. C. to arrive
a little after eight at my house. I therefore requested one of the
brethren to go with me, in order to take back to the Orphan Houses what
the Lord might send in by post or in any other way. It was now half past
eight in the evening, and there was no bread yet in any one of the three
houses for to-morrow. A few moments after, brother C. arrived, and he
had not been more than about five minutes in my house when he gave me
half a sovereign which he brought for the orphans. I soon found an
opportunity to leave the room for a little, gave the ten shillings to
the brother whom I had brought with me from the Orphan Houses, and who
was waiting in another room; and thus between nine and ten o'clock
sufficient bread could be bought. Observe! For the trial of our faith
the Lord had allowed us to be kept waiting so long. When, however,
brother C. had arrived, having money for the orphans, he _could not
delay giving it at once_, a matter most worthy of notice. This has been
a week full of trials of faith, but also full of deliverances.

Feb. 21. Since Saturday evening came in one pound eight shillings
elevenpence. There was also sent from Plymouth a piece of blond, a piece
of quilling net, and eleven pairs of children's stockings, for sale.
Thus we were supplied with means for that which was requisite for the
beginning of this day; but, as our stores had been so reduced at the
end of last week, there was not enough for tea this afternoon. Four
o'clock had now come, one hour before the usual tea-time, when a brother
from Somersetshire came to see the Orphan Houses, and put a sovereign
into each of the boxes. Our great need soon brought out the money, and
thus we were supplied. [Observe! The brother, as he himself told me a
few days after in the course of conversation, had but little time, and
therefore rather hastily went over the houses. Had he stayed long and
conversed much, as might have been the case, his donations would not
have been in time for the tea.] There came in one shilling besides, by
needlework done by the children.

Feb. 25. Greater than now our need had never been. Our trials of faith
have never been so sharp as during this week. Indeed, so much so, that
most of the laborers felt to-day considerably tried. Yet neither this
day has the Lord suffered us to be confounded. Through a remarkable
circumstance one of the laborers obtained some money this morning, so
that all the need of to-day could be amply met.

Feb. 26. My prayer this morning was in particular that the Lord would be
pleased now to look in pity upon us, and take off his hand. Indeed, for
several days my prayer has been that he would enable us to continue to
trust in him, and not lay more upon us than he would enable us to bear.
This is now again Saturday. There having been given yesterday a rich
supply to the matrons, I knew that not so much as usual would be
required _this_ Saturday; still, I thought that one pound ten shillings
would be needed. Between ten and eleven o'clock this morning a parcel
came from Clapham, containing two pounds two shillings, with two frocks,
two petticoats, two chemises, two pinafores, and six handkerchiefs, all
new. Thus we were richly supplied for to-day, for only one pound ten
shillings was needed.

March 2. This evening were sent, by order of an Irish sister,
thirty-three and a half pounds of woollen yarn. Respecting this donation
it is to be remarked that last Saturday we had asked the Lord, in our
prayer meeting, that he would be pleased to send us means to purchase
worsted, in order that the boys might go on with their knitting.

March 9. At a time of the greatest need, both with regard to the day
schools and the orphans, so much so that we could not have gone on any
longer without help, I received this day ten pounds from a brother who
lives near Dublin. The money was divided between the day schools and the
Orphan Houses. The following little circumstance is to be noticed
respecting this donation. As our need was so great, and my soul was,
through grace, truly waiting upon the Lord, I looked out for supplies in
the course of this morning. The post, however, was out, and no supplies
had come. This did not in the least discourage me. I said to myself, the
Lord can send means without the post, or even now, though the post is
out, by this very delivery of letters he may have sent means, though the
money is not yet in my hands. It was not long after I had thus spoken to
myself when, according to my hope in God, we were helped; for the
brother who sent us the ten pounds, had this time directed his letter to
the Boys' Orphan House, whence it was sent to me.

March 17. From the 12th to the 16th had come in four pounds five
shillings elevenpence halfpenny for the orphans. This morning our
poverty, which now has lasted more or less for several months, had
become exceedingly great. I left my house a few minutes after seven to
go to the Orphan Houses to see whether there was money enough to take in
the milk, which is brought about eight o'clock. On my way it was
especially my request that the Lord would be pleased to pity us, even
as a father pitieth his children, and that he would not lay more upon us
than he would enable us to bear. I especially entreated him that he
would now be pleased to refresh our hearts by sending us help. I
likewise reminded him of the consequences that would result, both in
reference to believers and unbelievers, if we should have to give up the
work because of want of means, and that he therefore would not permit
its coming to nought. I moreover again confessed before the Lord that I
deserved not that he should continue to use me in this work any longer.
While I was thus in prayer, about two minutes' walk from the Orphan
Houses, I met a brother who was going at this early hour to his
business. After having exchanged a few words with him, I went on; but he
presently ran after me, and gave me one pound for the orphans. Thus the
Lord speedily answered my prayer. Truly, it is worth being poor and
greatly tried in faith for the sake of having day by day such precious
proofs of the loving interest which our kind Father takes in everything
that concerns us. And how should our Father do otherwise? He that has
given us the greatest possible proof of his love which he could have
done, in giving us his own Son, surely he will with him also freely give
us all things. It is worth also being poor and greatly tried in faith,
if but thereby the hearts of the children of God may be comforted and
their faith strengthened, and if but those who do not know God, and who
may read or hear of his dealings with us, should be led thereby to see
that faith in God is more than a mere notion, and that there is indeed
reality in Christianity. In the course of this day there came in still
further thirteen shillings.

March 19. Saturday. As it has often been the case on Saturdays, so it
was this day in particular. We began the day in very great poverty, as
only seven shillings had come in since the day before yesterday. There
was not one ray of light as to natural prospects. The heart would be
overwhelmed at such seasons, were there not an abundance of repose to be
found by trusting in God. The trial having continued so long, and our
poverty having now come to such a degree that it was necessary we should
have help in order that the name of the Lord might not be dishonored, I
had proposed to my fellow-laborers that we should set apart this day
especially for prayer. We met accordingly at half past ten in the
morning. By that time had come in four shillings sixpence, seven
shillings sixpence, and ten shillings. In the afternoon we met again at
three, when ten shillings came in. In the evening, at seven, we met once
more, there being yet about three shillings needed to provide all that
was required. This also we received, and even three shillings more than
was actually needed came in, just when we were about to separate.

April 9. Saturday. Only one shilling sixpence had come in since
yesterday afternoon. We needed more money than there was in hand,
especially as it was Saturday, but the Lord was pleased particularly to
try our faith. In the course of the morning came from some sisters in
Dublin, eighteen yards of calico, thirty-four yards of print,
forty-three balls of cotton, and a pair of worn lady's boots. This
donation came most seasonably, as we had been mentioning repeatedly the
need of calico and print in our prayers, and the sewing-cotton and the
pair of boots came at once into use. Moreover, this donation was a sweet
encouragement to me to continue waiting upon the Lord. Evening was now
approaching, and no money had yet come in for provisions, etc., which
would be needed on the Lord's day. About six o'clock, I gave myself once
more to prayer with my wife, and requested the Lord in my prayer that if
the sister who in love to him has taken upon her the service of
disposing of the articles which are given for sale had any money in
hand, he would be pleased to incline her heart to bring or send the
money this evening. After this I sat down peacefully to read the
Scriptures, being assured that this time also the Lord would stretch out
his hand on our behalf. _About half past seven o'clock_, the sister, to
whom reference has just now been made, came and brought one pound ten
shillings fourpence for articles which she had sold, stating that,
though she was unwell, _yet she felt herself constrained not to delay
bringing this money_. Thus we had all that was needed, and six shillings
more. When I arrived with the money at the Infant Orphan House, about
eight o'clock, I found my fellow-laborers in prayer, and while we still
continued in prayer a sister sent a large basket of stale bread, being
five brown loaves, seven bread cakes, and five French loaves.

April 12. We were never in greater need than to-day, perhaps never in so
much, when I received this morning one hundred pounds from the East
Indies. It is impossible to describe the real joy in God it gave me. My
prayer had been again this morning particularly that our Father would
pity us, and now at last send larger sums. I was not in the least
surprised or excited when this donation came, for I took it as that
_which came in answer to prayer, and had been long looked for_.

May 6. Only three pounds ten shillings twopence halfpenny had been
received since the 2d, on which account there would have been only
enough means in hand to provide for the breakfast to-morrow morning,
when in this our fresh need we received eighty-six pounds, two pair of
gold earrings, a brooch, and two rupees.

May 10. To-day, in closing the accounts, we have left, at the end of
this period of seventeen months, in which we have been so often
penniless, the sum of sixteen pounds eighteen shillings tenpence
halfpenny for the orphans, and forty-eight pounds twelve shillings five
and one fourth pence for the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution.

The time now seemed to us to have come, when, for the profit of the
church at large, the Lord's dealings with us, with reference to the
various objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, should be made
known by publishing another Report. For, whilst we, on purpose, had
delayed it at this time five months longer than during the previous
years, and that during a period when we were in deeper poverty than
during any previous time; yet, as from the commencement it had appeared
to me important from time to time to make known the Lord's dealings with
us, so I judged it profitable still to seek to comfort, to encourage, to
exhort, to instruct, and to warn the dear children of God by the printed
accounts of the Lord's goodness to us.

Though our trials of faith during these seventeen months lasted longer
and were sharper than during any previous period, yet during all this
time the orphans had everything that was needful in the way of
nourishing food, the necessary articles of clothing, etc. Indeed, I
should rather at once send the children back to their relations than
keep them without sufficient maintenance.

I desire that all the children of God who may read these details may
thereby be led to increased and more simple confidence in God for
everything which they may need under any circumstances, and that these
many answers to prayer may encourage them to pray, particularly as it
regards the conversion of their friends and relations, their own
progress in grace and knowledge, the state of the saints whom they may
know personally, the state of the church of Christ at large, and the
success of the preaching of the gospel. Especially, I affectionately
warn them against being led away by the device of Satan, to think that
these things are peculiar to me, and cannot be enjoyed by all the
children of God; for though, as has been stated before, every believer
is not called upon to establish orphan houses, charity schools, etc.,
and trust in the Lord for means, yet all believers are called upon, in
the simple confidence of faith, to cast all their burdens upon him, to
trust in him for everything, and not only to make everything a subject
of prayer, but to expect answers to their petitions which they have
asked according to his will and in the name of the Lord Jesus. Think
not, dear reader, that I have _the gift of faith_, that is, that gift of
which we read in 1 Cor. xii. 9, and which is mentioned along with "the
gifts of healing," "the working of miracles," "prophecy," and that on
that account I am able to trust in the Lord. _It is true_ that the faith
which I am enabled to exercise is altogether God's own gift; it is true
that he alone supports it, and that he alone can increase it; it is true
that moment by moment, I depend on him for it, and that if I were only
one moment left to myself my faith would utterly fail; but _it is not
true_ that my faith is that gift of faith which is spoken of in 1 Cor.
xii. 9. It is the self-same faith which is found in _every believer_,
and the growth of which I am most sensible of to myself; for by little
and little it has been increasing for the last six and twenty years.

This faith which is exercised respecting the Orphan Houses, and my own
temporal necessities shows itself in the same measure, for instance,
concerning the following points: I have never been permitted to doubt
during the last twenty-seven years that my sins are forgiven, that I am
a child of God, that I am beloved of God, and that I shall be finally
saved; because I am enabled by the grace of God to exercise faith upon
the word of God, and believe what God says in those passages which
settle these matters (1 John v. 1; Gal. iii. 26; Acts x. 43; Romans x.
9, 10; John iii. 16, etc.). Further, at the time when I thought I
should be insane, though there was not the least ground for thinking so,
I was in peace; because my soul believed the truth of that word, "We
know that all things work together for good to them that love God." Rom.
viii. 28. Further: When my brother in the flesh and my dear aged father
died, and when concerning both of them I had no _evidence_ whatever that
they were saved (though I dare not say that they are lost, for I know it
not), yet my soul was at peace, perfectly at peace, under this great
trial, this exceedingly great trial, this trial which is one of the
greatest perhaps which can befall a believer. And what was it that gave
me peace? My soul laid hold on that word, "Shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right?" This word, together with the whole character of
God, as he has revealed himself in his holy word, settled all
questionings. I believed what he has said concerning himself, and I was
at peace, and have been at peace ever since, concerning this matter.
Further: When the Lord took from me a beloved infant, my soul was at
peace, perfectly at peace; I could only weep tears of joy when I did
weep. And why? Because my soul laid hold in faith on that word, "Of such
is the kingdom of heaven." Matthew xix. 14. Further: When sometimes all
has been dark, exceedingly dark, with reference to my service among the
saints, judging from natural appearances; yea, when I should have been
overwhelmed indeed in grief and despair had I looked at things after the
outward appearance: at such times I have sought to encourage myself in
God, by laying hold in faith on his almighty power, his unchangeable
love, and his infinite wisdom, and I have said to myself, God is able
and willing to deliver me, if it be good for me; for it is written, "He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things?" Rom. viii. 32. This it
was which, being believed by me through grace, kept my soul in peace.
Further: When in connection with the Orphan Houses, day schools, etc.,
trials have come upon me which were far heavier than the want of means,
when lying reports were spread that the orphans had not enough to eat,
or that they were cruelly treated in other respects, and the like; or
when other trials, still greater, but which I cannot mention, have
befallen me in connection with this work, and that at a time when I was
nearly a thousand miles absent from Bristol, and had to remain absent
week after week; at such times my soul was stayed upon God; I believed
his word of promise which was applicable to such cases; I poured out my
soul before God, and arose from my knees in peace, because the trouble
that was in the soul was in believing prayer cast upon God, and thus I
was kept in peace, though I saw it to be the will of God to remain far
away from the work. Further: When I needed houses, fellow-laborers,
masters and mistresses for the orphans or for the day schools, I have
been enabled to look for all to the Lord, and trust in him for help.

Dear reader, I may seem to boast; but, by the grace of God, I do not
boast in thus speaking. From my inmost soul I do ascribe it to God alone
that he has enabled me to trust in him, and that hitherto he has not
suffered my confidence in him to fail. But I thought it needful to make
these remarks, lest any one should think that my depending upon God was
a particular gift given to me which other saints have no right to look
for; or lest it should be thought that this my depending upon him had
_only to do with the obtaining of_ MONEY _by prayer and faith_. By the
grace of God I desire that my faith in God should extend towards
EVERYTHING, the smallest of my own temporal and spiritual concerns, and
the smallest of the temporal and spiritual concerns of my family,
towards the saints among whom I labor, the church at large, everything
that has to do with the temporal and spiritual prosperity of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution, etc. Dear reader, do not think that I
have attained in faith (and how much less in other respects!) to that
degree to which I might and ought to attain; but thank God for the faith
which he has given me, and ask him to uphold and increase it. And
lastly, once more, let not Satan deceive you in making you think that
_you_ could not have the same faith, but that it is only for persons who
are situated as I am. When I lose such a thing as a key, I ask the Lord
to direct me to it, and I look for an answer to my prayer; when a person
with whom I have made an appointment does not come, according to the
fixed time, and I begin to be inconvenienced by it, I ask the Lord to be
pleased to hasten him to me, and I look for an answer; when I do not
understand a passage of the word of God, I lift up my heart to the Lord,
that he would be pleased, by his Holy Spirit, to instruct me, and I
expect to be taught, though I do not fix the time when, and the manner
how it should be; when I am going to minister in the word, I seek help
from the Lord, and while I, in the consciousness of natural inability as
well as utter unworthiness, begin this his service, I am not cast down,
but of good cheer, because I look for his assistance, and believe that
he, for his dear Son's sake, will help me. And thus in other of my
temporal and spiritual concerns I pray to the Lord, and expect an answer
to my requests; and may not _you_ do the same, dear believing reader?
Oh! I beseech you, do not think me an extraordinary believer, having
privileges above other of God's dear children, which they cannot have;
nor look on my way of acting as something that would not do for other
believers. Make but trial! Do but stand still in the hour of trial, and
you will see the help of God, if you trust in him. But there is so often
a forsaking the ways of the Lord in the hour of trial, and thus the
_food for faith_, the means whereby our faith may be increased, is lost.
This leads me to the following important point. You ask, How may I, a
true believer, have my faith strengthened? The answer is this:--

I. "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning." James i. 17. As the increase of faith is a good
gift, it must come from God, and therefore he ought to be asked for this
blessing.

II. The following means, however, ought to be used: 1. _The careful
reading of the word of God, combined with meditation on it._ Through
reading of the word of God, and especially through meditation on the
word of God, the believer becomes more and more acquainted with the
nature and character of God, and thus sees more and more, besides his
holiness and justice, what a kind, loving, gracious, merciful, mighty,
wise, and faithful being he is, and, therefore, in poverty, affliction
of body, bereavement in his family, difficulty in his service, want of a
situation or employment, he will repose upon the _ability_ of God to
help him, because he has not only learned from his word that he is of
almighty power and infinite wisdom, but he has also seen instance upon
instance in the Holy Scriptures in which his almighty power and infinite
wisdom have been actually exercised in helping and delivering his
people; and he will repose upon the _willingness_ of God to help him,
because he has not only learned from the Scriptures what a kind, good,
merciful, gracious, and faithful being God is, but because he has also
seen in the word of God, how in a great variety of instances he has
proved himself to be so. And the consideration of this, if _God has
become known to us through prayer and meditation on his own word_, will
lead us, in general at least, with a measure of confidence to rely upon
him: and thus the reading of the word of God, together with meditation
on it, will be one especial means to strengthen our faith.

2. As, with reference to the growth of every grace of the Spirit, it is
of the utmost importance that we seek to maintain an upright heart and a
good conscience, and, therefore, do not knowingly and habitually indulge
in those things which are contrary to the mind of God, so it is also
particularly the case with reference to the _growth in faith_. How can I
possibly continue to act faith upon God, concerning anything, if I am
habitually grieving him, and seek to detract from the glory and honor of
him in whom I profess to trust, upon whom I profess to depend? All my
confidence towards God, all my leaning upon him in the hour of trial,
will be gone, if I have a guilty conscience, and do not seek to put away
this guilty conscience, but still continue to do things which are
contrary to the mind of God. And if, in any particular instance, I
cannot trust in God, because of the guilty conscience, then my faith is
weakened by that instance of distrust; for faith with every fresh trial
of it either increases by trusting God, and thus getting help, or it
decreases by not trusting him; and then there is less and less power of
looking simply and directly to him, and a habit of self-dependence is
begotten or encouraged. One or other of these will always be the case in
each particular instance. Either we trust in God, and in that case we
neither trust in ourselves, nor in our fellow-men, nor in circumstances,
nor in anything besides; or we DO trust in one or more of these, and in
that case do NOT trust in God.

3. If we, indeed, desire our faith to be strengthened, we should not
shrink from opportunities where our faith may be tried, and, therefore,
through the trial, be strengthened. In our natural state we dislike
dealing with God alone. Through our natural alienation from God we
shrink from him, and from eternal realities. This cleaves to us more or
less, even after our regeneration. Hence it is that, more or less, even
as believers, we have the same shrinking from standing with God alone,
from depending upon him alone, from looking to him alone; and yet this
is the very position in which we ought to be, if we wish our faith to be
strengthened. The more I am in a position to be tried in faith with
reference to my body, my family, my service for the Lord, my business,
etc., the more shall I have opportunity of seeing God's help and
deliverance; and every fresh instance in which he helps and delivers me
will tend towards the increase of my faith. On this account, therefore,
the believer should not shrink from situations, positions,
circumstances, in which his faith may be tried, but should cheerfully
embrace them as opportunities where he may see the hand of God stretched
out on his behalf, to help and deliver him, and whereby he may thus have
his faith strengthened.

4. The last important point for the strengthening of our faith is, that
we let God work for us, when the hour of the trial of our faith comes,
and do not work a deliverance of our own. Wherever God has given faith,
it is given, among other reasons, for the very purpose of being tried.
Yea, however weak our faith may be, God will try it; only with this
restriction, that as, in every way, he leads us on gently, gradually,
patiently, so also with reference to the trial of our faith. At first,
our faith will be tried very little in comparison with what it may be
afterwards; for God never lays more upon us than he is willing to enable
us to bear. Now, when the trial of faith comes, we are naturally
inclined to distrust God, and to trust rather in ourselves, or in our
friends, or in circumstances. We will rather work a deliverance of our
own, somehow or other, than simply look to God and wait for his help.
But if we do not patiently wait for God's help, if we work a
deliverance of our own, then at the next trial of our faith it will be
thus again, we shall be again inclined to deliver ourselves; and thus,
with every fresh instance of that kind, our faith will decrease; whilst,
on the contrary, were we to stand still in order to see the salvation of
God, to see his hand stretched out on our behalf, trusting in him alone,
then our faith would be increased, and with every fresh case in which
the hand of God is stretched out on our behalf in the hour of the trial
of our faith, our faith would be increased yet more. Would the believer,
therefore, have his faith strengthened, he must, especially, _give time
to God_, who tries his faith in order to prove to his child, in the end,
how willing he is to help and deliver him, the moment it is good for
him.

I now return, dear reader, to the Narrative, giving you some further
information with reference to the seventeen months from Dec. 10, 1840,
to May 10, 1842, as it respects the Orphan Houses, and other objects of
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad, besides the
facts of which mention has been already made.

During this period, also, 1. Two Sunday schools were entirely supported
by the funds of the Institution. 2. There were two adult schools, one
for females, and one for males, entirely supported during these
seventeen months, in which on two evenings of the week the males, and on
two evenings the females, were instructed, quite gratuitously, in
reading and writing, and were furnished with books and writing materials
gratuitously. There were, during these seventeen months, 344 adults
taught in these two schools, and on May 10, 1842, the number under
instruction amounted to 110. 3. There were, during these seventeen
months, also six day schools entirely supported by the funds of the
Institution, three for boys and three for girls. On May 10, 1842, the
number of the children who attended these day schools was 363; and the
total number who, from the formation of the Institution, March 5, 1834,
up to May 10, 1842, had been instructed in the day schools, which are
supported by the funds of the Institution, amounts to 2,616. 4. During
these seventeen months, 798 copies of the Holy Scriptures were
circulated, and from the commencement of the Institution, up to May 10,
1842, 6,842 copies. 5. During these seventeen months was spent for
missionary purposes the sum of £126, 15s. 3d. of the funds of the
Institution, whereby assistance was rendered to the work of God in
Jamaica, in Australia, in Canada, and in the East Indies. 6. At the
commencement of these seventeen months, _i. e._ on Dec. 10, 1840, a new
object was begun, the circulation of such publications as may be
beneficial, with the blessing of God, to both unbelievers and believers.
We laid out for this object during these seventeen months the sum of
£62, 17s. 4d., for which 22,190 such little publications were purchased,
and of which number 19,609 were actually given away. 7. There were
received into the three Orphan Houses 15 orphans, who, together with
those who were in the houses on Dec. 10, 1840, make up 106 in all. Of
these, five girls were sent out to service, two boys and one girl were
apprenticed, one girl was removed by a lady who had placed her for a
time under our care, and one was sent back to his relations, as he was
injurious to the other children.

There were on May 10, 1842, 96 orphans in the three houses, _i. e._ 30
in the Girls' Orphan House, 37 in the Infant Orphan House, and 29 in the
Boys' Orphan House. Besides this, three apprentices were supported by
the funds of the Institution; so that the total number was 99. The
number of orphans who were under our care from April, 1836, to May 10,
1842, amounts to 144.

I notice further, in connection with the Orphan Houses, that, _without
any one having been asked for anything by me_, the sum of £5,276, 14s.
8d. was given to me from the beginning of the work up to May 10, 1842,
_as the result of prayer to God_.

The total of the expenditure for the various objects of the Institution,
exclusive of the Orphan Houses, during these seventeen months, amounted
to £710, 11s. 5d.; the total of the income amounted to £746, 1s. 0½d.
The total of the expenditure for the three Orphan Houses, from Dec. 10,
1840, to May 10, 1842, amounted to £1,337, 15s. 2¾d.; the total of
the income amounted to £1,339, 13s. 7d.




CHAPTER XV.

PROSPERITY.

1842-1843.

    ABUNDANT SUPPLIES--RESTING ON THE WRITTEN WORD--"SEEKING AND
    FINDING"--ERRONEOUS IMPRESSIONS REMOVED--PERSEVERING AND
    PREVAILING PRAYER ANSWERED--"LENGTHENING THE CORDS AND
    STRENGTHENING THE STAKES"--A FOURTH ORPHAN HOUSE.


June 3, 1842. For several days past I had not been particularly led to
pray for means for the orphans. Last evening, however, I did so, as we
had now again no money in hand, there having come in only ten pounds two
shillings twopence during the last five days; and in answer to my
request two pounds nineteen shillings sixpence came in this morning.

    For several months succeeding the last date, means continued to
    flow in, without interruption, as they were needed. There was no
    excess of means, nor was there any lack. On Dec. 1, 1842, Mr.
    Müller  writes:--

Nothing had come in, except five shillings for needlework. The laborers
had nothing to give, except one of them one shilling sixpence; yet this
little supplied the absolute need, which was only milk. We were unable
to take in the usual quantity of bread. Should it be said that the not
taking in the usual quantity of bread would at once prove to the bakers
that we are poor, my reply is, that that does not follow, because bread
has often been sent as a present, as may be seen in the list of
articles, given for the orphans, at the end of the printed Reports. But
perhaps it may be asked, Why do you not take the bread on credit? What
does it matter whether you pay immediately for it, or at the end of the
month, or the quarter, or the half year? Seeing that the Orphan Houses
are the work of the Lord, may you not trust in him that he will supply
you with means to pay the bills which you contract with the butcher,
baker, grocer, etc. as the things which you purchase are needful? My
reply is this: 1. If the work in which we are engaged is indeed the work
of God, then he whose work it is is surely able and willing to provide
the means for it. 2. But not only so, he will also provide the means _at
the time when they are needed_. I do not mean that he will provide them
when _we think_ that they are needed; but yet that when there is real
need, such as the necessaries of life being required, he will give them;
and on the same ground on which we suppose we do trust in God to help us
to pay the debt which we now contract, we may and ought to trust in the
Lord to supply us with what we require at present, so that there may be
no need for going into debt. 3. It is true, I might have goods on
credit, and to a very considerable amount; but, then, the result would
be, that the next time we were again in straits, the mind would
involuntarily be turned to further credit which I might have, instead of
being turned to the Lord, and thus faith, which is kept up and
strengthened only by being EXERCISED, would become weaker and weaker,
till at last, according to all human probability, I should find myself
deeply in debt and have no prospect of getting out of it. 4. Faith has
to do with the word of God,--rests upon the written word of God; but
there is no promise that he will pay our debts. The word says rather,
"Owe no man anything;" whilst there is the promise given to his
children, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee," and, "Whosoever
believeth on him shall not be confounded." On this account we could not
say, _upon the ground of the Holy Scriptures_, Why do you not trust in
God that he will supply you with means to pay your debts which you
contract in his service for the necessities of the orphans? 5. The last
reason why we do not take goods on credit is this: The chief and primary
object of the work was not the temporal welfare of the children, nor
even their spiritual welfare, blessed and glorious as it is, and much
as, through grace, we seek after it and pray for it; but the first and
primary object of the work was, _to show before the whole world and the
whole church of Christ, that even in these last evil days the living God
is ready to prove himself as the living God, by being ever willing to
help, succor, comfort, and answer the prayers of those who trust in
him_: so that we need not go away from him to our fellow-men, or to the
ways of the world, seeing that he is both able and willing to supply us
with all we can need in his service.

From the beginning, when God put this service into my heart, I had
anticipated trials and straits; but knowing, as I did, the heart of God,
through the experience of several years previously, I also knew that he
would listen to the prayers of his child who trusts in him, and that he
would not leave him in the hour of need, but listen to his prayers, and
deliver him out of the difficulty, and that then, this being made known
in print for the benefit of both believers and unbelievers, others would
be led to trust in the Lord. We discern, therefore, more and more
clearly that it is for the church's benefit that we are put into these
straits, and if therefore in the hour of need we were to take goods on
credit, the first and primary object of the work would be completely
frustrated, and no heart would be further strengthened to trust in God;
nor would there be any longer that manifestation of the special and
particular providence of God which has hitherto been so abundantly shown
through this work, even in the eyes of unbelievers, whereby they have
been led to see _that there is after all reality in the things of God_,
and many, through these printed accounts, have been truly converted. For
these reasons, then, we consider it our precious privilege, as
heretofore, to continue to wait upon the Lord only, instead of taking
goods on credit, or borrowing money from some kind friends, when we are
in need. Nay, we purpose, as God shall give us grace, to look to him
only, though morning after morning we should have nothing in hand for
the work, yea, though from meal to meal we should have to look to him;
being fully assured that he who is now (1845) in the tenth year feeding
these many orphans, and who has never suffered them to want, and that he
who is now (1845) in the twelfth year carrying on the other parts of the
work, without any branch of it being stopped for want of means, will do
so for the future also. And here I do desire, in the deep consciousness
of my natural helplessness and dependence upon the Lord, to confess that
through the grace of God my soul has been in peace, though day after day
we have had to wait for our daily provisions upon the Lord; yea, though
even from meal to meal we have been required to do this.

Dec. 16. Nothing has come in. Three shillings fivepence, which one of
the laborers was able to give, was all we had. At six o'clock this
evening, our need being now very great, not only with reference to the
Orphan Houses, but also the day schools, etc., I gave myself, with two
of the laborers, to prayer. There needed some money to come in before
eight o'clock to-morrow morning, as there was none to take in milk for
breakfast (the children have oatmeal porridge with milk for breakfast),
to say nothing about the many other demands of to-morrow, being
Saturday. Our hearts were at peace, while asking the Lord, and assured
that our Father would supply our need. WE HAD SCARCELY RISEN FROM OUR
KNEES when I received a letter, containing a sovereign for the orphans,
half of which was from a young East India officer, and the other half
the produce of the sale of a piece of work which the sister who sent the
money had made for the benefit of the orphans. She wrote, "I love to
send these little gifts. They so often come in season." Truly, thus it
was at this time. About five minutes later I received from a brother the
promise of fifty pounds for the orphans, to be given during the next
week; and a quarter of an hour after that, about seven o'clock, a
brother gave me a sovereign, which an Irish sister in the Lord had left
this day, on her departure for Dublin, for the benefit of the orphans.
How sweet and precious to see thus so manifestly the willingness of the
Lord to answer the prayers of his needy children!

Dec. 19. Our need with reference to the school fund had been great
during the last three weeks, though we had received as much as the
teachers absolutely required. Now, however, it was very great, as one
brother especially needed to have several pounds within a day or two,
and three other teachers also required supplies. It had in addition to
this been much in my heart to send some money to several brethren who
labor in foreign lands, in dependence upon the Lord only for their
pecuniary supplies; but I had been kept from doing so for want of means.
On these accounts, therefore, I gave myself again especially to prayer
this morning, when, _within a quarter of an hour_ after I had risen
from my knees, I received the order for one hundred pounds, which I was
at liberty to use as need required.


REVIEW OF THE YEAR, 1842.

1. As to the church. There are 601 at present in communion; 73 have been
added during the past year, of whom 27 have been brought to the
knowledge of the Lord among us.

2. As to the supply of my temporal necessities, the Lord has been
pleased to send me £329, 16s.


Feb. 11, 1843. We had one pound fourteen shillings towards the expenses
of this day. But as this was not enough, I asked the Lord still further
for help, and, behold, this morning's post brought me a post-office
order for two pounds from Stafford, of which one pound seven shillings
sixpence is for the orphans. Thus we have three pounds one shilling
sixpence, which is quite enough for this day.

Admire with me, my dear reader, if you know the Lord, his seasonable
help. Why does this post-office order not come a few days sooner or
later? Because the Lord would help us by means of it, and therefore
influences the donor just then, and not sooner nor later, to send it.
Surely, all who know the Lord, and who have no interest in disowning it,
cannot but see his hand in a remarkable manner in this work. Nor will
the godly and simple-minded reader say, "There is no difference between
this way of proceeding, on the one hand, and going from individual to
individual, asking them for means, on the other hand; for the writing of
the Reports is just the same thing." My dear reader, there is a great
difference. Suppose that we are in need. Suppose that our poverty lasts
for some weeks, or even some months, together. Is there not, in that
case, a difference between asking the Lord only from day to day,
without speaking to any human being not connected directly with the work
about our poverty, on the one hand, and writing letters or making
personal application to benevolent individuals for assistance, on the
other hand? Truly, there is a great difference between these two modes.
I do not mean to say that it would be acting against the precepts of the
Lord to seek for help in his work by personal and individual application
to _believers_ (though it would be in direct opposition to his will to
apply to _unbelievers_, 2 Cor. vi. 14-18); but _I_ act in the way in
which I do for the benefit of the church at large, cheerfully bearing
the trials, and sometimes the deep trials, connected with this life of
faith (which however brings along with it also its precious joys), if by
any means a part at least of my fellow-believers might be led to see the
reality of dealing with God only, and that there is such a thing as the
child of God having power with God by prayer and faith. That the Lord
should use for so glorious a service one so vile, so unfaithful, so
altogether unworthy of the least notice as I am, I can only ascribe to
the riches of his condescending _grace_, in which he takes up the most
unlikely instruments, that the honor may be _manifestly_ his.

Should Satan seek to whisper into your ears, Perhaps the matter is made
known, after all, when there is need (as it has been once said about me
at a public meeting in a large town, that when we were in want I prayed
_publicly_ that the Lord would send help for the orphans, which is
entirely false); I say, should it be said that I took care that our
wants were made known, I reply: Whom did I ask for anything these many
years since the work has been going on? To whom did I make known our
wants, except to those who are closely connected with the work? Nay, so
far from wishing to make known our need, for the purpose of influencing
benevolent persons to contribute to the necessities of the Institution
under my care, I have even refused to let our circumstances be known,
after having been asked about them, when, on simply saying that we were
in need, I might have had considerable sums. Some instances of this have
been given in the former part of this Narrative. In such cases I refused
in order that the hand of God only might be manifest; for that, and not
the money, nor even the ability of continuing to carry on the work, is
my especial aim. And such self-possession has the Lord given me, that in
the times of the deepest poverty, whilst there was nothing at all in
hand, and whilst we had even from meal to meal to wait upon the Lord for
the necessities of more than one hundred persons, when a donation of
five pounds or ten pounds, or more, has been given to me, the donors
could not have read in my countenance whether we had much or nothing at
all in hand. But enough of this. I have made these few remarks, beloved
reader, lest by any means you should lose the blessing which might come
to your soul through reading the account of the Lord's faithfulness and
readiness to hear the prayers of his children.

March 8. On Oct. 25, 1842, I had a long conversation with a sister in
the Lord, who opened her heart to me. On leaving me I told her that my
house and my purse were hers, and that I should be glad if she would
have one purse with me. This I said because I judged that at some future
time it might prove a comfort to her in an hour of trial, having at the
same time, to judge from a circumstance which had occurred two days
before, every reason to believe that she had not five pounds of her own.
This sister, after I had said so, readily took me at my word, and said,
I shall be glad of it, adding presently that she had five hundred
pounds. The moment I heard that, I drew back, and said that had I known
that she had any money I should not have made her this offer, and then
gave her my reason why I had supposed she had no property at all. She
then assured me that she possessed five hundred pounds, and that she had
never seen it right to give up this money, else she would have done so;
but that, as God had put this sum into her hands without her seeking,
she thought it was a provision which the Lord had made for her. I
replied scarcely anything to this; but she asked me to pray for her with
reference to this matter. This whole conversation about the money
occupied but very few minutes, and it all took place after the sister
had risen and was on the point of leaving me. After she was gone, I
asked the Lord if he would be pleased to make this dear sister so happy
in himself; and enable her so to realize her true riches and inheritance
in the Lord Jesus, and the reality of her heavenly calling, that she
might be constrained by the love of Christ cheerfully to lay down this
five hundred pounds at his feet. From that time I repeated this my
request before the Lord _daily_, and often two, three, or four times a
day; _but not a single word or line passed between me and this sister on
the subject, nor did I even see her_; for I judged that it would be far
better that she retained this money, than that by persuasion she should
give it up, and afterwards perhaps regret the step she had taken, and
thereby more dishonor than honor be brought on the name of the Lord.
After I had thus for twenty-four days daily besought the Lord on behalf
of this sister, I found her one day, on returning home, at my house;
when she told me that she wished to see me alone. She then said to me
that from the time she had last conversed with me she had sought to
ascertain the Lord's will with reference to the five hundred pounds, and
had examined the Scriptures and prayed about it, and that she was now
assured that it was the will of the Lord she should give up this money.
After she had told me this, I exhorted her to count well the cost, and
to do nothing rashly, lest she should regret the step she had taken,
and to wait at least a fortnight longer before she carried out her
intention. Thus we separated. On the eighteenth day after this
conversation I received the following letter:--

    DEAR BROTHER:

    I believe the Lord has not permitted you to grow weary of
    remembering me, but that he has still enabled you to bear me
    upon your heart in his presence. All is well with me, dear
    brother. Your petitions have been heard and answered; I am happy
    and at peace. The Lord has indeed manifested his tender care of
    and his great love towards me in Jesus, in inclining my heart
    cheerfully to lay _all_ I have hitherto called my own at his
    feet. It is a high privilege.

    I write in haste to ask you, as we have _now_ one purse, to
    receive the money at a bank in Bristol. I will direct it to be
    sent in my name, to be delivered into your hands, etc.

As this whole circumstance is related only for the profit of the reader,
and as I knew that the sister still had my letters on the subject in her
possession, I wrote to her, requesting her to send them to me, at the
time when I published the last account about the Orphan Houses, etc.,
and extracts of them were given in the last Report, in so far as they
might refer to the subject or tend to edification. These extracts are
here reprinted. My reply to the above was this:--

                                             BRISTOL, DEC. 6, 1842.

    MY DEAR SISTER:

    Your letter found me in peace, and did not in the least surprise
    me. Dealing with God is a reality. Saints have power with him
    through Jesus. It is now forty-two days since you first
    mentioned this matter to me. I cannot but admire the wisdom of
    God and his love to you in allowing me to speak to you as I did
    [_i. e._ offering her to have one purse with me, when I thought
    she had no earthly possessions at all], that thus this great
    privilege might be bestowed on you to give up this little sum
    for him. Since that hour I have daily prayed for you, and often
    thrice or more in the course of the day, that the Lord would
    make you so happy in himself, and help you with such faith to
    lay hold on all which he has given you in Jesus, that you might
    be constrained by love cheerfully to lay down this little sum at
    his feet. Thus I prayed again at six o'clock this morning for
    you. Nor have I had the least doubt from the commencement that
    the Lord did hear my prayer; yea, so fully have I been assured
    that I had the petition, that again and again I have thanked him
    that he had answered my prayer, before I saw you eighteen days
    since, and before your letter came this morning. Moreover, I
    have been fully assured, since you were last here, that he was
    carrying on his work in your soul with reference to this matter,
    and that no subtle suggestions of Satan, nor educational
    prejudices, nor misinterpretations of the Scriptures, were able
    to prevail; for I had asked the Lord by his Spirit to overcome
    them in you, and that, if a brother's word should be needed, he
    would be pleased to incline your heart to write to me; and as no
    letter came, I felt fully confident you were going forward in
    this matter in peace. When I had seen you this day six weeks,
    and learned about this little sum, _I determined never to say or
    write to you another word on the subject, but to leave you in
    the hands of the Lord_. Thus I purposed again during the last
    eighteen days; _for it was not the money given up_, that I cared
    for in you, _but the money given up unto the Lord, and from
    right motives_. On this very account I advised you to wait one
    fortnight longer, though you had come to the conclusion; but
    now, having done so, and seeing that you are fully purposed in
    the Lord to be poor in this world indeed, that the more
    abundantly you may enjoy his riches, his inexhaustible riches, I
    change my advice. My word now, beloved sister, is this:
    "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might," and
    "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." Delay
    then no longer, even as also you have no desire to delay; and
    the Lord will bless you abundantly in doing so, _inasmuch as you
    do it unto him_. As you desire to intrust me with this money, I
    do not refuse it, knowing many ways to lay it out for him, etc.
    [Then only follows the direction how the money is to be paid
    into my banker's hands.]

On Dec. 18, 1842, I received a reply to my letter, which answer was
begun to be written on Dec. 8th, but finished on the 16th. I give a few
extracts of the letter:--

    Since I last saw you, dear brother, I have not had the slightest
    doubt as to what I ought to do. The word of God has been so
    clear to me on this head, that I have been kept resting on it,
    and, in answer to your prayers, no temptation has been allowed
    to _prevail_, indeed, I think I may add to _arise_. But I feel
    that temptations _may_ come, and that I may in seasons of trial
    not always have faith to be able to rejoice in this privilege.
    My heart is so deceitful, and my faith so weak, that I shall
    greatly need your prayers still. Will you, then, if the Lord
    enables you, pray that I may never offend my Father by
    regretting in the _least_ measure this act of obedience, which
    he has by his grace inclined me to carry out? _Before I ever saw
    you_ I had asked the Lord to make me willing to give this little
    sum into your hands, if it were his will I should; but his time
    to make me willing had not then come; even then I had in a
    measure given it to you, having written a paper, desiring in
    case I should fall asleep in Jesus, that you might get
    possession of it. I had it signed by two witnesses, and I always
    carried it about with me when I travelled, sealed, and directed
    to you. When I wrote this, I little thought what grace the Lord
    had in store for me. You will forgive my being thus tedious, but
    I am sure you will praise the Lord with me for his gracious
    dealings with me, etc.

At the end of this letter, which was finished on Dec. 16, the sister
tells me that unexpectedly a hindrance had arisen to her having
possession of the money, so that it was not likely it could be paid over
to me till about the end of January, 1843.

When this letter came, it would have been _naturally_ a great
disappointment to me, as the sister had told me in a previous letter
that the money should be paid into my hands, and as just at that time in
a variety of ways it was desirable that I should have considerable sums.
The Lord, however, enabled me to immediately lay hold on that word, "We
know that all things work together for good to them that love God," Rom.
viii. 28, and my soul was in peace, though we had only enough money in
hand to provide for one or at the most for two days the necessary
provisions in the Orphan Houses. It was but the next day, Dec. 19, 1842,
when I received one hundred pounds from A. B., and on Dec. 22, I
received fifty pounds from a brother in Bristol, besides other
donations; so that within one week after I had had grace to delight
myself in the will of God, he gave me about two hundred pounds, whereby
I was able to meet all the heavy expenses of replenishing the stores,
etc., on account of which I should _naturally_ have been tried in the
payment of the money being delayed.

In reply to the letter which I received from this sister on Dec. 18, I
wrote another on Dec. 31, 1842, of which I give an extract on this
subject:--

    I have continued to pray for you, or rather the Lord has enabled
    me every day once, twice, thrice, or even more, to remember you.
    The burden of my prayer still has been, that he would be pleased
    to make you very happy in himself, and enable you to enter into
    the inheritance which awaits you; further, that you may not be
    permitted in the least to regret the step which you have taken,
    but rather consider it a privilege to be permitted to give this
    little sum back to him who gave it to you, and who gave himself
    for you. With reference to the delay, I cannot but rejoice. This
    gives you abundant opportunity to ponder the matter, and
    afterwards to state to any (who, judging as those who know not
    how rich the saints are, might blame you) that you did not do
    the thing in haste. I consider this delay to be for the
    furtherance of the honor of the Lord. You know my advice to you,
    to wait at least a fortnight. That you have seen much of your
    unfaithfulness, etc., I consider to be an especial blessing
    which the Lord has bestowed upon you, lest this step you have
    taken should become a snare to you. Humblings last our whole
    life. Jesus came not to save _painted_ but _real_ sinners; but
    he _has_ saved us, and will surely make it manifest. I have a
    passage laid on my heart for you; read the whole of it
    carefully: 2 Cor. viii. 1-9, especially verse 9.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day after day now passed away and the money did not come. The month of
January was come to an end, and February also, and the money had not
come. Thus more than one hundred and twenty days were gone by, whilst
day by day I brought my petition before the Lord that he would bless
this sister, keep her steadfast in her purpose, and intrust me with this
money for his work in my hands. Amidst it all my heart was assured,
judging from the earnestness which he had given me in prayer, and that I
had only desired this matter to the praise of his name, that in his own
time he would bring it about. _But I never wrote one single line to this
sister on the subject all this time._ At last, on the one hundred and
thirty-fourth day since I had _daily_ besought the Lord about this
matter, on March 8, 1843, I received a letter from the sister, informing
me that the five hundred pounds had been paid into the hands of my
bankers.

And now I only give a few lines of a letter which I received on July 3,
1844, from the sister who gave this donation, together with my letters
for which I had asked her, in order that I may show her state of mind on
the subject, after she had had it more than twenty months before her,
and after she had for sixteen months actually given up the money. She
writes thus: "I am thankful to say that I have never for one moment had
the slightest feeling of regret, but it is _wholly_ of the Lord's
abounding grace. I speak it to his praise."

On March 31, 1843, I called at the Orphan Houses to make certain
arrangements, and one of the sisters told me by the way that she had
been asked by Miss G., who with her father occupied the house No. 4
Wilson Street, to let me know that they wished to give up their house,
if I would like to take it; but she had replied that it was of no use
to tell me about it, for she was sure that I had no thought of opening
another Orphan House. When I came home, this matter greatly occupied my
mind. I could not but ask the Lord again and again whether he would have
me to open another Orphan House, and whether the time was now come that
I should serve him still more extensively in this way. The more I
pondered the matter, the more it appeared to me that this was the hand
of God moving me onwards in this service. The following remarkable
combination of circumstances struck me in particular: 1. There are more
applications made for the admission of orphans, especially of late, than
we are at all able to meet, though we fill the houses as much as the
health of the children and of the laborers will possibly admit. 2. If I
did take another house for orphans, it would be most desirable it should
be in the same street where the other three are, as thus the labor is
less, and in times of great need we are near together for prayer, the
distribution of the money, etc. But since the third Orphan House was
opened, in Nov. 1837, there never has been one of the larger houses in
the street to be let. 3. There are about fifteen children in the Infant
Orphan House, whom it would have been well some time ago to have removed
to the house for the older girls, had there been room; but when a
vacancy happened to occur in that house, there were generally several
waiting to fill it up, so that unintentionally the female children in
the Infant Orphan House remained where they were; but this is not well,
nor is it according to my original intention; for the infants were
intended only to be left till they are seven years old, and then to be
removed to the houses for older boys and girls. This my original plan
could be executed better for the future, and at once for the present,
were I to open another Orphan House. 4. I know two sisters who seem
suitable laborers for this fourth Orphan House, and who have a desire
thus to be engaged. 5. There are three hundred pounds remaining of the
five hundred pounds which I so lately received. This money may be used
for the furnishing and fitting up of a new Orphan House. So much money I
have never had in hand at any one time during the last five years. This
seemed to me a remarkable thing, in connection with the four other
reasons. 6. The establishing of a fourth Orphan House, which would
increase our expenses several hundred pounds a year, would be, after we
have gone for five years almost uninterruptedly through trials of faith,
a plain proof that I have not regretted this service, and that I am not
tired of this precious way of depending upon the Lord from day to day;
and thus the faith of other children of God might be strengthened.

But most important, yea, decidedly conclusive as these points were, yet
they did not convince me that I ought to go forward in this service, if
the Spirit's leadings were not in connection with them. I therefore gave
myself to prayer. I prayed day after day, _without saying anything to
any human being_. I prayed two and twenty days without even mentioning
it to my dear wife. On that very day, when I did mention it to her, and
on which I had come to the conclusion, after three weeks' prayer and
consideration in the fear of God, to establish another Orphan House, I
received from A. B. fifty pounds. What a striking confirmation that the
Lord will help, though the necessities should increase more and more. At
last, on the twenty-fourth day, having been now for several days fully
assured that God would have me go forward in this service, I went to
inquire whether Mr. and Miss G. still wished to give up the house. But
here I found an apparent hindrance. Having heard no wish expressed on my
part to take the house, and the sister in the Orphan Houses, with whom
Miss G. had communicated, not having given her the least reason to think
that I should do so, Mr. and Miss G. had altered their plans, and now
purposed to remain in the house. However, I was to call again in a week,
when I should receive an answer. I was not in the least discomforted by
this obstacle. "Lord, if _thou_ hast no need of another Orphan House,
_I_ have none," was the burden of my prayer. I was willing to do God's
will, yea, to delight myself in his will. And just on this very ground,
because I knew I sought not my own honor, but the Lord's; because I knew
I was not serving myself, but the Lord, in this thing; and because I
knew that with so much calm, quiet, prayerful, self-questioning
consideration I had gone about this business, and had only after many
days, during which I had been thus waiting upon the Lord, come to the
conclusion that it was the will of God I should go forward in this
service. For these reasons I felt sure, notwithstanding what Mr. and
Miss G. had told me, that I should have the house. I also especially
judged that thus it would be, _because I was quite in peace_ when I
heard of the obstacle; a plain proof that I was not in self-will going
on in this matter, but according to the leading of the Holy Ghost; for
if according to my natural mind I had sought to enlarge the work, I
should have been excited and uncomfortable when I met with this
obstacle. After a week I called again on Mr. G. And now see how God had
wrought! On the same day on which I had seen Mr. G., he went out and met
with a suitable house, so that when I came the second time, he was
willing to let me have the one which he then occupied in Wilson Street;
and as the owner accepted me as a tenant, all the difficulties were
removed, so that after the 1st of June we began fitting up the house,
and in July the first orphans were received.

Mr. M. having been invited by several Christians in Germany to visit
that, his native land, and to labor there for the promulgation of
scriptural truth and the advancement of religion, as well as to publish
a German translation of his Narrative, felt that it was his duty to
accede to the request. In answer to prayer, he received ample means for
his journey, for the support of the orphans during his absence, and for
the publication of the Narrative. He left Bristol on the 9th of August,
1843, and returned on March 6, 1844. During the journey he was greatly
aided by Providence in the purposes of his mission, and saw much fruit
of his labors.




CHAPTER XVI.

STEWARDSHIP.

1844.

    EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY TREASURES--SEEKING THE KINGDOM OF
    GOD--FELLOWSHIP WITH THE FATHER--THE CHRISTIAN
    MERCHANT--EXAMPLES--MISTAKES.


In concluding this portion of my Narrative, I would add some hints on a
few passages of the word of God, both because I have so very frequently
found them little regarded by Christians, and also because I have proved
their preciousness, in some measure, in my own experience; and therefore
wish that all my fellow-saints may share the blessing with me.

I. In Matt. vi. 19-21, it is written: "Lay not up for yourselves
treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do
not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also." Observe, dear reader, the following points concerning
this part of the divine testimony:

1. It is the Lord Jesus, our Lord and Master, who speaks this as the
lawgiver of his people,--he who has infinite wisdom and unfathomable
love to us, who therefore both knows what is for our real welfare and
happiness, and who cannot exact from us any requirement inconsistent
with that love which led him to lay down his life for us.

2. His counsel, his affectionate entreaty, and his commandment to us his
disciples is, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth." The
meaning obviously is, that the disciples of the Lord Jesus, being
strangers and pilgrims on earth, _i. e._ neither belonging to the earth
nor expecting to remain in it, _should not seek to increase their
earthly possessions_, in whatever these possessions may consist. This is
a word for poor believers as well as for rich believers; it has as much
a reference to putting shillings into the savings bank as to putting
thousands of pounds into the funds, or purchasing one house or one farm
after another. It may be said, But does not every prudent and provident
person seek to increase his means, that he may have a goodly portion to
leave to his children, or to have something for old age, or for the time
of sickness, etc.? My reply is, it is quite true that this is the custom
of the world. But whilst thus it is in the world, and we have every
reason to believe ever will be so among those that are of the world, and
who therefore have their portion on earth, we disciples of the Lord
Jesus, being born again, being the children of God, not nominally, but
really, being truly partakers of the divine nature, being in fellowship
with the Father and the Son, and having in prospect "an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away," (1 Peter i. 4,)
ought in every respect to act differently from the world, and so in this
particular also. If we disciples of the Lord Jesus seek, like the people
of the world, after an increase of our possessions, may not those who
are of the world justly question whether we believe what we say, when we
speak about our inheritance, our heavenly calling, our being the
children of God, etc.? Often it must be a sad stumbling-block to the
unbeliever to see a professed believer in the Lord Jesus acting in this
particular just like himself. Consider this, dear brethren in the Lord,
should this remark apply to you.

3. Our Lord says about the earth that it is a place "Where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal." All that is of
the earth, and in any way connected with it, is subject to corruption,
to change, to dissolution. There is no reality, or substance, in
anything else but in heavenly things. Often the careful amassing of
earthly possessions ends in losing them in a moment by fire, by robbery,
by a change of mercantile concerns, by loss of work, etc.; but suppose
all this were not the case, still, yet a little while, and thy soul
shall be required of thee; or, yet a little while, and the Lord Jesus
will return; and what profit shalt thou then have, dear reader, if thou
hast carefully sought to increase thy earthly possessions?

4. Our Lord, however, does not merely bid us not to lay up treasure upon
earth; for if he had said no more, this his commandment might be abused,
and persons might find in it an encouragement for their extravagant
habits, for their love of pleasure, for their habit of spending
everything they have, or can obtain, _upon themselves_. It does not
mean, then, as is the common phrase, that we should "live up to our
income;" for he adds, "But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven."
There is such a thing as laying up as truly in heaven as there is laying
up on earth; if it were not so, our Lord would not have said so. Just as
persons put one sum after another into the bank, and it is put down to
their credit, and they may use the money afterwards: so truly the penny,
the shilling, the pound, the hundred pounds, the ten thousand pounds,
_given for the Lord's sake, and constrained by the love of Jesus_, to
poor brethren, or in any way spent in the work of God, he marks down in
the book of remembrance, he considers as laid up in heaven. _The money
is not lost, it is laid up in the bank of heaven_; yet so, that whilst
an earthly bank may break, or through earthly circumstances we may lose
our earthly possessions, the money which is thus secured in heaven
_cannot be lost_. But this is by no means the only difference. I notice
a few more points: Treasures laid up on earth bring along with them many
cares; treasures laid up in heaven never give care. Treasures laid up on
earth never can afford spiritual joy; treasures laid up in heaven bring
along with them peace and joy in the Holy Ghost even now. Treasures laid
up on earth, in a dying hour cannot afford peace and comfort, and when
life is over they are taken from us; treasures laid up in heaven draw
forth thanksgiving that we were permitted and counted worthy to serve
the Lord with the means with which he was pleased to intrust us as
stewards, and when this life is over we are not deprived of what was
laid up there, but when we go to heaven we go to the place where our
treasures are, and we shall find them there. Often we hear it said, when
a person has died, he died worth so much. But whatever be the phrases
common in the world, it is certain that a person may die worth fifty
thousand pounds sterling, as the world reckons, and yet that individual
may not possess, in the sight of God, one thousand pounds sterling,
because _he was not rich towards God_, he did not lay up treasure in
heaven. And so, on the other hand, we can suppose a man of God falling
asleep in Jesus, and his surviving widow finding scarcely enough left
behind him to suffice for the funeral, who was nevertheless _rich
towards God_: in the sight of God he may possess five thousand pounds
sterling, he may have laid up that sum in heaven. Dear reader, does your
soul long to be rich towards God, to lay up treasures in heaven? The
world passes away, and the lust thereof. Yet a little while and our
stewardship will be taken from us. At present we have the opportunity of
serving the Lord with our time, our talents, our bodily strength, our
gifts; and also with our property; but shortly this opportunity may
cease. Oh, how shortly may it cease! Before ever this is read by any
one, I may have fallen asleep; and the very next day after you have read
this, dear reader, you may fall asleep; and, therefore, whilst we have
the opportunity, let us serve the Lord.

5. The Lord lastly adds: "For where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also." Where should the heart of the disciple of the Lord Jesus
be, but in heaven? Our calling is a heavenly calling, our inheritance is
a heavenly inheritance, and reserved for us in heaven; our citizenship
is in heaven; but if we believers in the Lord Jesus lay up treasures on
earth, the necessary result of it is, that our hearts will be upon
earth; nay, the very fact of our doing so proves that they are there!
Nor will it be otherwise, till there be a ceasing to lay up treasures
upon earth. The believer who lays up treasures upon earth may, at first,
not live openly in sin, he in a measure may yet bring some honor to the
Lord in certain things; but the injurious tendencies of this habit will
show themselves more and more, whilst the habit of laying up treasures
in heaven would draw the heart more and more heavenward; would be
continually strengthening his new, his divine nature, his spiritual
faculties, because it would call his spiritual faculties into use, and
thus they would be strengthened; and he would more and more, whilst yet
in the body, have his heart in heaven, and set upon heavenly things; and
thus the laying up treasures in heaven would bring along with it, even
in this life, precious spiritual blessings as a reward of obedience to
the commandment of our Lord.

II. The next passage, on which I desire to make a few remarks, is Matt.
vi. 33: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness; and
all these things shall be added unto you." After our Lord, in the
previous verses, had been pointing his disciples "to the fowls of the
air," and "the lilies of the field," in order that they should be
without carefulness about the necessaries of life, he adds: "Therefore
take no thought (literally, be not anxious), saying, What shall we eat?
or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after
all these things do the Gentiles seek;) for your heavenly Father knoweth
that ye have need of all these things." Observe here particularly that
we, the children of God, should be different from the nations of the
earth, from those who have no Father in heaven, and who therefore make
it their great business, their first anxious concern, what they shall
eat, and what they shall drink, and wherewithal they shall be clothed.
We, the children of God, should, as in every other respect, so in this
particular also, be different from the world, and prove to the world
that we believe that we have a Father in heaven who knoweth that we have
need of all these things. The fact that our Almighty Father, who is full
of infinite love to us his children, and who has proved to us his love
in the gift of his only-begotten Son, and his almighty power in raising
him from the dead, knows that we have need of these things, should
remove all anxiety from our minds. There is, however, one thing that we
have to attend to, and which we _ought_ to attend to, with reference to
our temporal necessities; it is mentioned in our verse: "But seek ye
first the kingdom of God and his righteousness." The great business
which the disciple of the Lord Jesus has to be concerned about (for this
word was spoken to disciples, to professed believers) is, to seek the
kingdom of God, _i. e._ to seek, as I view it, after the external and
internal prosperity of the church of Christ. If, according to our
ability, and according to the opportunity which the Lord gives us, we
seek to win souls for the Lord Jesus, that appears to me to be seeking
the _external prosperity_ of the kingdom of God; and if we, as members
of the body of Christ, seek to benefit our fellow-members in the body,
helping them on in grace and truth, or caring for them in any way to
their edification, that would be seeking the _internal prosperity_ of
the kingdom of God. But in connection with this we have also "to seek
his righteousness," which means (as it was spoken to disciples, to those
who have a Father in heaven, and not to those who were without), to seek
to be more and more like God, to seek to be inwardly conformed to the
mind of God. If these two things are attended to (and _they imply also
that we are not slothful in business_), then do we come under that
precious promise: "And all these things (that is, food, raiment, or
anything else that is needful for this present life) shall be added unto
you." It is not _for_ attending to these two things that we obtain the
blessing, but _in_ attending to them.

I now ask you, my dear reader, a few questions in all love, because I do
seek your welfare, and I do not wish to put these questions to you
without putting them first to my own heart. Do you make it your primary
business, your first great concern, to seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness? Are the things of God, the honor of his name, the welfare
of his church, the conversion of sinners, and the profit of your own
soul, your chief aim? Or does your business, or your family, or your own
temporal concerns, in some shape or other _primarily_ occupy your
attention? If the latter be the case, then, though you may have all the
necessaries of life, yet could you be surprised if you had them not?
Remember that the world passeth away, but that the things of God endure
forever.

I never knew a child of God, who acted according to the above passage,
in whose experience the Lord did not fulfil his word of promise, "All
these things shall be added unto you."

III. The third portion of the divine testimony on which I desire to
throw out a few hints, is in 1 John i. 3: "And truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ." Observe,

1. The words "fellowship," "communion," "coparticipation," and
"partnership," mean the same.

2. The believer in the Lord Jesus does not only obtain forgiveness of
all his sins, as he does through the shedding of the blood of Jesus, by
faith in his name; does not only become a righteous one before God,
through the righteousness of the Lord Jesus, by faith in his name; is
not only begotten again, born of God, and partaker of the divine nature,
and therefore a child of God and an heir of God; but he is also in
fellowship or partnership with God. Now, so far as it regards God, and
our standing in the Lord Jesus, we have this blessing once for all; nor
does it allow of either an increase or a decrease. Just as God's love to
us believers, his children, is unalterably the same, whatever may be the
manifestations of that love; and as his peace with us is the same,
however much our peace may be disturbed; so it is also with regard to
our being in fellowship or partnership with him: it remains unalterably
the same so far as God is concerned. But then,

3. There is an _experimental_ fellowship, or partnership, with the
Father and with his Son, which consists in this: that all which we
possess in God, as being the partners or fellows of God, is brought down
into our daily life, is enjoyed, experienced, and used. This
_experimental_ fellowship, or partnership, allows of an increase or a
decrease, in the measure in which faith is in exercise, and in which we
are entering into what we have received in the Lord Jesus. The measure
in which we enjoy this _experimental_ fellowship with the Father and
with the Son is without limit; for without limit we may make use of our
partnership with the Father and with the Son, and draw by prayer and
faith out of the inexhaustible fulness which there is in God.

Let us now take a few instances in order to see the practical working of
this _experimental_ fellowship, or partnership, with the Father and with
the Son. Suppose there are two believing parents who were not brought to
the knowledge of the truth until some years after the Lord had given
them several children. Their children were brought up in sinful, evil
ways, whilst the parents did not know the Lord. Now the parents reap as
they sowed. They suffer from having set an evil example before their
children, for their children are unruly and behave most improperly. What
is now to be done? Need such parents despair? No. The first thing they
have to do is, to make confession of their sins to God, with regard to
neglecting their children whilst they were themselves living in sin, and
then to remember that they are in partnership with God, and therefore to
be of good courage, though they are in themselves still utterly
insufficient for the task of managing their children. They have in
themselves neither the wisdom, nor the patience, nor the long-suffering,
nor the gentleness, nor the meekness, nor the love, nor the decision and
firmness, nor anything else that may be needful in dealing with their
children aright. But their heavenly Father has all this. The Lord Jesus
possesses all this. And they are in partnership with the Father, and
with the Son, and therefore they can obtain by prayer and faith all they
need out of the fulness of God. I say by _prayer_ and _faith_, for we
have to make known our need to God in prayer, ask his help, and then we
have _to believe_ he will give us what we need. Prayer alone is not
enough. We may pray never so much, yet, if we do not believe that God
will give us what we need, we have no reason to expect that we shall
receive what we have asked for. So then these parents would need to ask
God to give them the needful wisdom, patience, long-suffering,
gentleness, meekness, love, decision; and firmness, and whatever else
they may judge they need. They may in humble boldness remind their
heavenly Father that his word assures them that they are in partnership
with him, and, as they themselves are lacking in these particulars, ask
him to be pleased to supply their need; and then they have _to believe_
that God will do it, and they shall receive according to their need.

Another instance: Suppose I am so situated in my business that day by
day such difficulties arise that I continually find that I take wrong
steps by reason of these great difficulties. How may the case be altered
for the better? In myself I see no remedy for the difficulties. In
looking at myself I can expect nothing but to make still further
mistakes, and, therefore, trial upon trial seems to be before me. And
yet I need not despair. The living God is my partner. _I_ have not
sufficient wisdom to meet these difficulties so as to be able to know
what steps to take, but _he_ is able to direct me. What I have,
therefore, to do, is this: in simplicity to spread my case before my
heavenly Father and my Lord Jesus. The Father and the Son are my
partners. I have to tell out my heart to God, and to ask him, that, as
he is my partner, and I have no wisdom in myself to meet all the many
difficulties which continually occur in my business, he would be pleased
to guide and direct me, and to supply me with the needful wisdom; and
then I have _to believe_ that God will do so, and go with good courage
to my business, and _expect_ help from him in the next difficulty that
may come before me. _I have to look out_ for guidance; _I have to
expect_ counsel from the Lord; and as assuredly as I do so, I shall have
it, I shall find that I am not nominally, but really, in partnership
with the Father and with the Son.

Another instance: There is a father and mother with seven small
children. Both parents are believers. The father works in a manufactory,
but cannot earn more than ten shillings per week. The mother cannot
earn anything. These ten shillings are too little for the supply of
nourishing and wholesome food for seven growing children and their
parents, and for providing them with the other necessaries of life. What
is to be done in such a case? Surely not to find fault with the
manufacturer, who may not be able to afford more wages, and much less to
murmur against God; but the parents have in simplicity to tell God,
their partner, that the wages of ten shillings a week are not sufficient
in England to provide nine persons with all they need, so as that their
health be not injured. They have to remind God that he is not a hard
master, not an unkind being, but a most loving Father, who has
abundantly proved the love of his heart in the gift of his only begotten
Son. And they have in childlike simplicity to ask him that either he
would order it so that the manufacturer may be able to allow more wages;
or that he (the Lord) would find them another place, where the father
would be able to earn more; or that he would be pleased, somehow or
other, as it may seem good to him, to supply them with more means. They
have to ask the Lord, in childlike simplicity, again and again for it,
if he does not answer their request at once; and they have _to believe_
that God, their Father and partner, will give them the desire of their
hearts. They have _to expect_ an answer to their prayers; day by day
they have _to look out_ for it, and to repeat their request till God
grants it. As assuredly as they _believe_ that God will grant them their
request, so assuredly it shall be granted.

Thus, suppose I desired more power over my besetting sins; suppose I
desired more power against certain temptations; suppose I desired more
wisdom, or grace, or anything else that I may need in my service among
the saints, or in my service towards the unconverted: what have I to do
but to make use of my being in fellowship with the Father and with the
Son? Just as, for instance, an old faithful clerk, who is this day taken
into partnership by an immensely rich firm, though himself altogether
without property, would not be discouraged by reason of a large payment
having to be made by the firm within three days, though he himself has
no money at all of his own, but would comfort himself with the immense
riches possessed by those who so generously have just taken him into
partnership: so should we, the children of God and servants of Jesus
Christ, comfort ourselves by being in fellowship, or partnership, with
the Father, and with the Son, though we have no power of our own against
our besetting sins; though we cannot withstand temptations, which are
before us, in our own strength; and though we have neither sufficient
grace nor wisdom for our service among the saints, or towards the
unconverted. All we have to do is, to draw upon our partner, the living
God. By prayer and faith we may obtain all needful temporal and
spiritual help and blessings. In all simplicity have we to tell out our
heart before God, and then we have to believe that he will give to us
according to our need.

But _if we do not believe_ that God will help us, could we be at peace?
The clerk, taken into the firm as partner, _believes_ that the firm will
meet the payment, though so large, and though in three days it is to be
made, and it is this that keeps his heart quiet, though altogether poor
himself. We have to believe that our infinitely rich partner, the living
God, will help us in our need, and we shall not only be in peace, but we
shall actually find that the help which we need will be granted to us.
Let not the consciousness of your entire unworthiness keep you, dear
reader, from believing what God has said concerning you. If you are
indeed a believer in the Lord Jesus, then this precious privilege, of
being in partnership with the Father and the Son, is yours, though you
and I are entirely unworthy of it. If the consciousness of our
unworthiness were to keep us from believing what God has said concerning
those who depend upon and trust in the Lord Jesus for salvation, then we
should find that there is not one single blessing, with which we have
been blessed in the Lord Jesus, from which, on account of our
unworthiness, we could derive any settled comfort or peace.

IV. There is one other point, which, in connection with several portions
of the word of God which bear on the subject, I desire to bring before
the believing reader, and it refers to the "scriptural way of overcoming
the difficulties with which the believer now meets who is engaged in a
business, trade, profession, or any earthly calling whatever, which
arise from competition in business, too great a number of persons being
occupied in the same calling, stagnation of trade, and the like." The
children of God, who are strangers and pilgrims on earth, have at all
times had difficulty in the world, for they are not _at_ home, but
_from_ home; nor should they, until the return of the Lord Jesus, expect
it to be otherwise with them. But whilst this is true, it is also true
that the Lord has provided us in all our difficulties with something in
his own word to meet them. All difficulties may be overcome by acting
according to the word of God. At this time I more especially desire to
point out the means whereby the children of God who are engaged in any
earthly calling may be able to overcome the difficulties which arise
from competition in business, too great a number of persons being
occupied in the same calling, stagnation of trade, and the like.

1. The first thing which the believer who is in such difficulties has to
ask himself is, _Am I in a calling in which I can abide with God?_ If
our occupation be of that kind that we cannot ask God's blessing upon
it, or that we should be ashamed to be found in it at the appearing of
the Lord Jesus, or that it _of necessity_ hinders our spiritual
progress, then we must give it up, and be engaged in something else; but
in few cases only this is needful. Far the greater part of the
occupations in which believers are engaged are not of such a nature as
that they need to give them up in order to maintain a good conscience,
and in order to be able to walk with God, though, perhaps, certain
alterations may need to be made in the manner of conducting their trade,
business, or profession. About these parts of our calling which may need
alteration, we shall receive instruction from the Lord if we indeed
desire it, and wait upon him for it, and expect it from him.

2. Now suppose the believer is in a calling in which he can abide with
God, the next point to be settled is, "_Why do I carry on this business,
or why am I engaged in this trade or profession?_" In most instances, so
far as my experience goes, which I have gathered in my service among the
saints during the last fifteen years and a half [_i. e._ in 1845], I
believe the answer would be, "I am engaged in my earthly calling that I
may earn the means of obtaining the necessaries of life for myself and
family." Here is the chief error from which almost all the rest of the
errors which are entertained by the children of God, relative to their
calling, spring. It is no right and scriptural motive to be engaged in a
trade or business or profession _merely_ in order to earn the means for
the obtaining of the necessaries of life for ourselves and family, _but
we should work because it is the Lord's will concerning us_. This is
plain from the following passages: 1 Thess. iv. 11, 12; 2 Thess. iii.
10-12; Eph. iv. 28. It is quite true that, in general, the Lord provides
the necessaries of life by means of our ordinary calling: but that that
is not THE REASON why we should work, is plain enough from the
consideration that if our possessing the necessaries of life depended
upon our ability of working, we could never have _freedom from anxiety_,
for we should always have to say to ourselves, And what shall I do when
I am too old to work, or when by reason of sickness I am unable to earn
my bread? But if, on the other hand, we are engaged in our earthly
calling because _it is the will of the Lord concerning us that we should
work_, and that thus laboring we may provide for our families, and also
be able to support the weak, the sick, the aged, and the needy, then we
have good and scriptural reason to say to ourselves, Should it please
the Lord to lay me on a bed of sickness, or keep me otherwise by reason
of infirmity, or old age, or want of employment, from earning my bread
by means of the labor of my hands, or my business, or my profession, he
will yet provide for me. Because we who believe are servants of Jesus
Christ, who has bought us with his own precious blood, and are not our
own, and because this our precious Lord and Master has commanded us to
work, therefore we work: and _in doing so_ our Lord will provide for us,
but whether in this way or any other way he is sure to provide for us,
for we labor in obedience to him; and if even a just earthly master give
wages to his servants, the Lord will surely see to it that we have our
wages, if, in obedience to him, we are engaged in our calling, and not
for our own sake.

How great the difference between acting according to the word of God and
according to our own natural desires, or the customs of the world, will
be plain, I trust, by the following case: Suppose I were engaged in some
useful trade. Suppose I had the certain human prospect that within the
next three months my labor would bring me in nothing, for certain
reasons connected with the state of mercantile affairs. As a man of the
world I should say, I shall not work at all, because my labor will not
be paid; but as a Christian, who desires to act according to God's holy
word, I ought to say, My trade is useful to society, and I will work,
notwithstanding all human prospects, because the Lord Jesus has
commanded me to labor; from him, and not from my trade, I expect my
wages. In addition to this, the Christian ought also to say, Idleness is
a dreadful snare of the devil; he has especial opportunity to get an
advantage over the children of God when they are unoccupied; and,
therefore, I will work though I have no human prospect of obtaining
payment for my labor, but shall get only the cost price of the material,
and shall have to give my work for nothing. Moreover, the Christian
ought to say, Though according to _human_ probability I shall have to
labor for nothing during the next three months, yet I will work, because
the Lord may speedily alter the state of things, contrary to all human
expectation; but whether he be pleased to do so or not, I labor because
I am the Lord's, bought by his precious blood, and he commands me to
labor.

But there are motives still lower than to be engaged in our earthly
calling merely that we may earn the means of obtaining the necessaries
of life, why even Christians, true children of God, may be engaged in
their calling, such as, to obtain a certain sum of money, and then to
retire from business and to live upon the interest; or to provide
something for old age; or to obtain a certain amount of property,
without intending to give up business. If it be unscriptural to be
engaged in our calling merely even for the sake of earning the means for
procuring the necessaries of life for ourselves and family, how much
more unbecoming that a child of God should be engaged in his calling for
the sake of any of the last-mentioned reasons.

This second point, then, Why do I carry on this business? Why am I
engaged in this trade or profession? ought first to be settled in the
fear of God, and according to the revealed will of God; and if we cannot
say, in honesty of heart, I do carry on my business, I am engaged in my
trade, or art, or profession, as a servant of Jesus Christ, whose I am,
because he has bought me with his precious blood, and he has commanded
me to work, and therefore I work,--I say, if we cannot say this in
honesty of heart, but must confess that we work on account of lower
motives, such as that we may earn our bread, or on account of still
lower motives, and such as are altogether unbecoming a child of God, who
is not of the world, but of God, such as to obtain a certain sum of
money in order to be able to live on the interest without having to
work, or to provide something for old age, or to obtain a certain amount
of property without intending to give up business;--if these are our
motives for being engaged in our calling, I say, can we be surprised
that we meet with great difficulties in our business, and that the Lord
in his abounding love to us, his erring children, does not allow us to
succeed? But suppose this second point is scripturally settled, and we
can honestly say that, because we are servants of Jesus Christ, we are
occupied as we are; we have further to consider,--

3. Whether we carry on our business, or are engaged in our trade, art,
or profession, _as stewards_ of the Lord. To the child of God it ought
not to be enough that he is in a calling in which he can abide with God,
nor that he is engaged in his calling because it is the will of his Lord
and Master that he should work, but he should consider himself in his
trade, business, art, or profession, only as the _steward_ of the Lord
with reference to his income. The child of God has been bought with the
precious blood of the Lord Jesus, and is altogether his property, with
all that he possesses, his bodily strength, his mental strength, his
ability of every kind, his trade, business, art, or profession, his
property, etc.; for it is written, "Ye are not your own; for ye are
bought with a price." 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. The proceeds of our calling are
therefore not our own in the sense of using them as our natural heart
wishes us to do, whether to spend them on the gratification of our
pride, or our love of pleasure, or sensual indulgences, or to lay by the
money for ourselves or our children, or use it in any way as we
_naturally_ like, but we have to stand before our Lord and Master, whose
_stewards_ we are, to seek to ascertain his will, how he will have us
use the proceeds of our calling.

But is this indeed the spirit in which children of God generally are
engaged in their calling? It is but too well known that it is not the
case! Can we then wonder at it, that even God's own dear children should
so often be found greatly in difficulty with regard to their calling,
and be found so often complaining about stagnation or competition in
trade, and the difficulties of the times, though there have been given
to them such precious promises as, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you;"
or, "Let your conversation (disposition or turn of mind) be without
covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have: for he hath
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." Heb. xiii. 5. Is it
not obvious enough that when our heavenly Father sees that we his
children do or would use the proceeds of our calling, _as our natural
mind_ would desire, that he either cannot at all intrust us with means,
or will be obliged to decrease them? No wise and really affectionate
mother will permit her infant to play with a razor, or with fire,
however much the child may desire to have them; and so the love and
wisdom of our heavenly Father will not, cannot, intrust us with
pecuniary means, _except it be in the way of chastisement, or to show us
finally their utter vanity_, if he sees that we do not desire to possess
them as _stewards_ for him, in order that we may spend them as he may
point out to us by his Holy Spirit, through his word.

In connection with this subject, I give a few hints to the believing
reader on three passages of the word of God. In 1 Cor. xvi. 2, we find
it written to the brethren at Corinth, "Upon the first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him." A
contribution for the poor saints in Judea was to be made, and the
brethren at Corinth were exhorted to put by for it, _every Lord's day_,
according to the measure of success which the Lord had been pleased to
grant them in their calling during the week. Now, ought not the saints
in our day also to act according to this word? There is no passage in
the word of God why we should not do so, and it is altogether in
accordance with our pilgrim character, not only once or twice, or four
times a year, to see how much we can afford to give to the poor saints,
or to the work of God in any way, but to seek to settle it weekly. If it
be said, I cannot ascertain how much I have gained in the course of the
week by my business, and therefore I cannot give accordingly; my reply
is this, Seek, dear brethren, as much as possible, to bring your
business upon such a footing as that you may be able, as nearly as
possible, to settle how much you have earned in your calling in the
course of the week. But suppose you should be unable to settle it
exactly to the shilling or pound, yet you will know pretty well how it
has been with you during the week, and therefore, _according to your
best knowledge_, contribute on the coming Lord's day towards the
necessities of the poor saints, and towards the work of God, as he,
after your having sought his guidance, may lead you.

Perhaps you say, the weeks are so unlike; in one week I may earn three
or even ten times as much as in another week, and if I give according to
my earnings from my calling during a very good week, then how are such
weeks, when I earn scarcely any thing, or how are the bad debts to be
met? How shall I do when sickness befalls my family, or when other
trials productive of expense come upon me, if I do not make provision
for such seasons? My reply is, 1. I do not find in the whole New
Testament one single passage in which either directly or indirectly
exhortations are given to provide against deadness in business, bad
debts, and sickness, by laying up money. 2. Often the Lord is obliged to
allow deadness in business, or bad debts, or sickness in our family, or
other trials which increase our expenses, to befall us, because we do
not, as his _stewards_, act _according to stewardship_, but as if we
were owners of what we have, forgetting that the time has not yet come
when we shall enter upon _our possessions_; and he does so in order
that, by these losses and expenses, our property which we have collected
may be decreased, lest we should altogether set our hearts again upon
earthly things, and forget God entirely. His love is so great, that he
will not let his children quietly go their own way when they have
forsaken him; but if his loving admonitions by his Holy Spirit are
disregarded, he is obliged in fatherly love to chastise them. A striking
illustration of what I have said we have in the case of Israel
nationally. The commandment to them was, to leave their land
uncultivated in the seventh year, in order that it might rest, and the
Lord promised to make up for this deficiency by his abundant blessing
resting upon the sixth year. However, Israel acted not according to this
commandment, no doubt saying, in the unbelief of their hearts, as the
Lord had foretold, "What shall we eat in the seventh year? Behold, we
shall not sow, nor gather in our increase." Levit. xxv. But what did the
Lord do? He was determined the land should have rest, and as the
Israelites did not willingly give it, he sent them for seventy years
into captivity, in order that thus the land might have rest. See Levit.
xxvi. 33-35. Beloved brethren in the Lord, let us take heed so to walk
as that the Lord may not be obliged by chastisement to take a part of
our earthly possessions from us in the way of bad debts, sickness,
decrease of business, and the like, because we would not own our
position as _stewards_, but act as _owners_, and keep for ourselves the
means with which the Lord had intrusted us, not for the gratification of
our own carnal mind, but for the sake of using them in his service and
to his praise.

It might also be said by a brother whose earnings are small, should _I_
also give according to my earnings? They are already so small that my
wife can only with the greatest difficulty manage to make them
sufficient for the family. My reply is, Have you ever considered, my
brother, that the very reason why the Lord is obliged to let your
earnings remain so small may be the fact of your spending everything
upon yourselves, and that if he were to give you more you would only use
it to increase your own family comfort, instead of looking about to see
who among the brethren are sick, or who have no work at all, that you
might help them, or how you might assist the work of God at home or
abroad? There is a great temptation for a brother whose earnings are
small to put off the responsibility of assisting the needy and sick
saints, or helping on the work of God, and to lay it upon the few rich
brethren and sisters with whom he is associated in fellowship, and thus
rob his own soul!

It might be asked, How much shall I give of my income? The tenth part,
or the fifth part, or the third part, or one half, or more? My reply is,
God lays down no rule concerning this point. What we do we should do
cheerfully and not of necessity. But if even Jacob, with the first
dawning of spiritual light (Genesis xxviii. 22), promised to God the
tenth of all he should give to him, how much ought we believers in the
Lord Jesus to do for him: we, whose calling is a heavenly one, and _who
know distinctly_ that we are children of God, and joint heirs with the
Lord Jesus! Yet do all the children of God give even the _tenth_ part
of what the Lord gives them? That would be two shillings per week for
the brother who earns one pound, and four shillings to him who earns two
pounds, and two pounds per week to him whose income is twenty pounds per
week.

In connection with 1 Cor. xvi. 2, I would mention two other portions: 1.
"He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he that soweth
bountifully shall reap also bountifully." 2 Cor. ix. 6. It is certain
that we children of God are so abundantly blessed in Jesus, by the grace
of God, that we ought to need no stimulus to good works. The forgiveness
of our sins, the having been made forever the children of God, the
having before us the Father's house as our home;--these blessings ought
to be sufficient motives to constrain us in love and gratitude to serve
God abundantly all the days of our life, and cheerfully also to give up,
as he may call for it, that with which he has intrusted us of the things
of this world. But whilst this is the case, the Lord nevertheless holds
out to us in his holy word motives why we should serve him, deny
ourselves, use our property for him, etc., and the last mentioned
passage is one of that kind. The verse is true, both with reference to
the life that is now, and that which is to come. If we have been
sparingly using our property for him, there will have been little
treasure laid up in heaven, and therefore a small amount of capital will
be found in the world to come, so far as it regards reaping. Again, we
shall reap bountifully if we seek to be rich towards God, by abundantly
using our means for him, whether in ministering to the necessities of
the poor saints, or using otherwise our pecuniary means for his work.
Dear brethren, these things are realities! Shortly, very shortly, will
come the reaping-time, and then will be the question whether we shall
reap sparingly or bountifully.

But while this passage refers to the life hereafter, it also refers to
the life that now is. Just as now the _love of Christ_ constrains us to
communicate of that with which the Lord intrusts us, so will be the
present reaping, both with regard to spiritual and temporal things.
Should there be found, therefore, in a brother, the want of entering
into his position as being merely a _steward_ for the Lord in his
calling, and should he give no heed to the admonitions of the Holy Ghost
to communicate to those who are in need or to help the work of God, then
can such a brother be surprised that he meets with great difficulties in
his calling, and that he cannot get on? This is according to the Lord's
word. He is _sowing sparingly_, and he therefore _reaps sparingly_. But
should _the love of Christ_ constrain a brother, out of the earnings of
his calling, to sow bountifully, he will even in this life reap
bountifully, both with regard to blessings in his soul, and with regard
to temporal things. Consider in connection with this the following
passage, which, though taken from the Book of Proverbs, is not of a
Jewish character, but true concerning believers under the present
dispensation also: "There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.
The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that watereth shall be
watered also himself." Prov. xi. 24, 25.

In connection with 1 Cor. xvi. 2, I would also direct my brethren in the
Lord to the promise made in Luke vi. 38: "Give, and it shall be given
unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye
mete withal it shall be measured to you again." This refers evidently to
the present dispensation, and evidently in its primary meaning to
temporal things. Now let any one, _constrained by the love of Jesus_,
act according to this passage; let him on the first day of the week
communicate as the Lord has prospered him, and he will see that the
Lord will act according to what is contained in this verse. If pride
constrain us to give, if self-righteousness make us liberal, if natural
feeling induce us to communicate, or if we give whilst we are in a state
of insolvency, not possessing more perhaps than ten shillings in the
pound, were our creditors to come upon us; then we cannot expect to have
this verse fulfilled in our experience; nor should we give at any time
for the sake of receiving again from others, according to this verse;
but if indeed _the love of Christ constrain us_ to communicate according
to the ability which the Lord gives us, then we shall have this verse
fulfilled in our experience, though this was not the motive which
induced us to give. Somehow or other the Lord will abundantly repay us,
through the instrumentality of our fellow-men, what we are doing to his
poor saints, or in any way for his work, and we shall find that in the
end we are not losers, even with reference to temporal things, whilst we
communicate liberally of the things of this life with which the Lord has
intrusted us.

Here it might be remarked, But if it be so that even in this life, and
with regard to temporal things, it is true that "to him that gives shall
be given, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over," and that "he which soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully," then in the end the most liberal persons would be
exceedingly rich. Concerning this remark we have to keep in mind, that
the moment persons were to begin to give for the sake of receiving more
back again from the Lord, through the instrumentality of their
fellow-men, than they have given; or the moment persons wished to alter
their way, and no more go on sowing bountifully, but sparingly, in order
to increase their possessions, whilst God is allowing them to reap
bountifully, the river of God's bounty toward them would no longer
continue to flow. God had supplied them abundantly with means, because
he saw them act as _stewards_ for him. He had intrusted them with a
little which they had used for him, and he therefore intrusted them with
more; and if they had continued to use the much also for him, he would
have still more abundantly used them as instruments to scatter abroad
his bounties. The child of God must be willing to be a channel through
which God's bounties flow, both with regard to temporal and spiritual
things. This channel is narrow and shallow at first, it may be; yet
there is room for some of the waters of God's bounty to pass through.
And if we cheerfully yield ourselves as channels for this purpose, then
the channel becomes wider and deeper, and the waters of the bounty of
God can pass through more abundantly. Without a figure, it is thus: At
first, we may be only instrumental in communicating five pounds, or ten
pounds, or twenty pounds, or fifty pounds, or one hundred pounds, or two
hundred pounds per year, but afterwards double as much; and, if we are
still more faithful in our stewardship, after a year or two four times
as much, afterwards perhaps eight times as much, at last perhaps twenty
times or fifty times as much. We cannot limit the extent to which God
may use us as instruments in communicating blessing, both temporal and
spiritual, if we are willing to yield ourselves as instruments to the
living God, and are content to be _only instruments, and to give him all
the glory_.

But with regard to temporal things it will be thus, that if indeed we
walk according to the mind of God in these things, whilst more and more
we become instruments of blessing to others, we shall not seek to enrich
ourselves, but be content, when the last day of another year finds us
still in the body, to possess no more than on the last day of the
previous year, or even considerably less, whilst we have been, however,
in the course of the year, the instruments of communicating largely to
others, through the means with which the Lord had intrusted us. As to
my own soul, by the grace of God, it would be a burden to me that
however much my income in the course of the year might have been, I were
increasing in earthly possession; for it would be a plain proof to me
that I had not been acting as a _steward_ for God, and had not been
yielding myself as a channel for the waters of God's bounty to pass
through. I also cannot but bear my testimony here, that in whatever
feeble measure God has enabled me to act according to these truths for
the last fifteen years [this was written in 1845]; I have found it to be
profitable, most profitable to my own soul; and as to temporal things, I
never was a loser in doing so, but I have most abundantly found the
truth in 2 Cor. ix. 6, and Luke vi. 38, and Prov. xi. 24, 25, verified
in my own experience. I only have to regret that I have acted so little
according to what I have now been stating; but my godly purpose is by
the help of God, to spend the remainder of my days in practising these
truths more than ever; and I am sure that when I am brought to the close
of my earthly pilgrimage, either in death, or by the appearing of our
Lord Jesus, I shall not have the least regret in having done so; and I
know that, should I leave my dear child behind, the Lord will abundantly
provide for her, and prove that there has been a better provision made
for her than her father could have made, if he had sought to insure his
life or lay up money for her.

Before leaving this part of the subject, I mention to the believing
reader, that I know instance upon instance in which what I have been
saying has been verified, but I will only mention the following: I knew
many years ago a brother as the manager of a large manufactory. Whilst
in this capacity he was liberal, and giving away considerably out of his
rather considerable salary. The Lord repaid this to him; for the
principals of the establishment, well knowing his value to their house
of business, gave him now and then, whilst he thus was liberally using
his means for the Lord, very large presents in money. In process of
time, however, this brother thought it right to begin business on his
own account, in a very small way. He still continued to be liberal,
according to his means, and God prospered him, and prospered him so that
now, whilst I am writing, his manufactory is as large as the one which
he formerly managed, or even larger, though that was a very considerable
one. And sure I am that if this brother shall be kept by God from
setting his heart upon earthly things, and from seeking more and more to
increase his earthly riches, but shall delight himself in being used as
a _steward_ by God, cheerfully communicating to the need of God's poor
children, or to his work in other ways, and doing so not sparingly, but
bountifully, the Lord will intrust him more and more with means; if
otherwise, if he shut up his hands, seek his own, wish to obtain
sufficient property that he may be able to live on his interest, then
what he has to expect is that God will shut up his hands, he will meet
with heavy losses, or there will be an alteration in his affairs for the
worse, or the like.

I also mention two other cases, to show that the Lord increases our
ability of communicating temporal blessings to others if we distribute
according to the means with which he has intrusted us, though we should
not be in a trade or business or profession. I know a brother who many
years ago saw it right not only to spend his interest for the Lord, but
also the principal, as the Lord might point out to him opportunities.
His desire was not, as indeed it ought never to be, to get rid of his
money as fast as possible, yet he considered himself a steward for the
Lord, and was therefore willing, as his Lord and Master might point it
out to him, to spend his means. When this brother came to this
determination, he possessed about twenty thousand pounds sterling.
According to the light and grace which the Lord had been pleased to
give, he afterwards acted, spending the money for the Lord, in larger or
smaller sums, as opportunities were pointed out to him by the Lord. Thus
the sum more and more decreased, whilst the brother steadily pursued his
course, serving the Lord with his property, and spending his time and
ability also for the Lord, in service of one kind or another among his
children. At last, the twenty thousand pounds were almost entirely
spent, when at that very time the father of this very brother died,
whereby he came into the possession of an income of several thousand
pounds a year. It gives joy to my heart to be able to add, that this
brother still pursues his godly course, living in the most simple way,
and giving away perhaps ten times as much as he spends on himself or
family. Here you see, dear reader, that this brother, using faithfully
for the Lord what he had been intrusted with at first, was made steward
over more; for he has now more than one third as much in a year coming
in as he at first possessed altogether.

I mention another instance: I know a brother to whom the Lord has given
a liberal heart, and who bountifully gave of that over which the Lord
had set him as steward. The Lord, seeing this, intrusted him with still
more, for through family circumstances he came into the possession of
many thousand pounds, in addition to the considerable property he
possessed before. I have the joy of being able to add also concerning
this brother, that the Lord continues to give him grace to use his
property as a steward for God, and that he has not been permitted to set
his heart upon his riches, through the very considerable increase of his
property, but that he continues to live as the steward of the Lord, and
not as the owner of all this wealth.

And now, dear reader, when the brethren to whom I have been referring
are brought to the close of their earthly pilgrimage, will they have one
moment's regret that they have used their property for the Lord? Will it
be the least particle of uneasiness to their minds, or will their
children be the worse for it? O no! The only regret they will have
concerning this matter will be, that they did not serve the Lord still
more abundantly with their property. Dear reader, let us each in our
measure act in the same spirit. Money is really worth no more than as it
is used according to the mind of the Lord; and life is worth no more
than as it is spent in the service of the Lord.

Whilst the three points mentioned--1. That our calling must be of that
nature that _we can abide in it with God_; 2. That unto the Lord we
should labor in our calling, as _his servants_, because he has bought us
with his blood, and because he will have us to labor; 3. That as
_stewards_ we should labor in our calling, because the earnings of our
calling are the Lord's and not our own, as he has bought us with his
blood;--I say, whilst these three points are particularly to be attended
to in order that the Lord's blessing may rest upon our calling, and we
be prospering in it, there are, nevertheless, some other points to be
attended to, which I mention in love to my brethren in the Lord, by whom
they may be needed.

4. The next point is, that _a believer in the Lord Jesus should do
nothing in his calling which is purely for the sake of attracting the
world_; such as, for instance, fitting up his shop or rooms of business
in the most costly manner. I do not in the least mean to say that his
shop or rooms of business should not be clean, orderly, and of such a
character as that there may be no positive hindrance in persons going
there. All the _needful_ conveniences that are expected may be there,
and ought to be there. But if any child of God seek to have the front of
his shop, or the interior of his shop, or of his place of business,
fitted up in a most expensive way, simply for the sake of attracting
attention, then let him be aware that, just in so far as he is trusting
in these things, he is not likely to succeed in his calling, because he
puts the manner of fitting up the shop in the room of trust in the Lord.
Such things the Lord may allow to succeed in the case of an unbeliever,
but they will not prosper in the case of a child of God, except it be in
the way of chastisement, just as the Lord gave to Israel in the
wilderness the desire of their hearts, but sent leanness into their
souls. Should any brother have fallen into this error, the first thing
he has to do, when the Lord has instructed him concerning this point, is
to make confession of sin, and, as far as it can be done, to retrace his
steps in this particular. If this cannot be done, then to cast himself
upon the mercy of God in Christ Jesus.

5. Of the same character is, to seek to attract the attention of the
world by "boasting advertisements," such as "no one manufactures so good
an article," "no one sells this article so cheap," "we sell the best
article in the city," etc. Suppose these statements were quite correct,
yet they are unbecoming for a child of God, who has the living God to
care for him and to provide for him, and therefore needs not to make use
of such boasting, whereby he may seek to insure custom to himself and
keep it from others. The law of love is, "Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them." Matt. vii. 12. Now what do I
wish in this particular that others should do to me, but that they
should not seek to keep away persons from dealing with me; but if I use
such like expressions in my advertisements, as have been mentioned, what
do they imply but that I wish all people should come to me, and deal
with me? If, however, already under the old covenant it was said, "Thou
shalt not covet," how much more sinful and altogether unbecoming is it
for us children of God, who are in fellowship with the Father and the
Son, to make use of such means in order to insure to ourselves pecuniary
advantages. But, however much the Lord may allow a man of the world to
prosper in using such means, they are only hindrances to the child of
God to getting on in his calling, because the Lord sees that they are
substituted instead of trust in himself; and should the Lord for a
season allow his child apparently to be benefited by them, it will only
be for his chastisement and connected with leanness in his soul.
Therefore, my brethren in the Lord, I beseech you to put away all these
things out of your calling, lest you should be hindering instead of
furthering your real welfare.

6. Likewise of a similar character is the following point, which God may
suffer to be a real hindrance to his children in their calling; it is,
To seek the very best, and therefore the most expensive, situations
which can be had in a town or city. Now, I do by no means intend to say,
that in our trade, business, art, or profession, we should seek the most
obscure, retired, out of the way place possible, and say, "God will
provide, and I need not mind in what part of the town I carry on my
calling." There are most assuredly certain things to be considered. The
persons who are likely to buy the articles I sell, or employ me, are to
be considered, and I have not to say, it matters nothing to me whether I
make them come a mile or two to my house, or to the most dirty and
disagreeable part of the town; this would be the extreme in the other
way. But whilst there is a certain consideration to be used with
reference to those who may employ us in our calling, yet if the trust of
the child of God respecting temporal prosperity is in the fact that he
lives in the best situation, the Lord will surely disappoint him. He
will have to pay a very high rent for the best situation, and yet not
succeed, because his trust is in the best situation. He is substituting
it for dependence upon the living God for customers. He is robbing his
soul, not only in not taking the customers as from the hands of the
Lord, but he is also obliging his heavenly Father, in the very love of
his heart, to cause him to be disappointed, because he is not trusting
in him. If the child of God were saying and acting thus: the best
situation would cost me fifty pounds a year more rent than one which is
not really inconvenient for my customers, nor in an improper
neighborhood, and the like; this fifty pounds I dedicate unto the Lord,
to be paid in instalments for his work or his poor saints, whenever the
rent-day comes; such a brother would find himself to be no loser, if
this indeed were done in dependence upon the Lord, and constrained by
the love of Jesus. But if the fifty pounds more is paid for rent, and
yet the living God, in the very love of his heart, should be obliged to
withhold prosperity from his child in his calling, because he sees that
he is laying undue stress upon the situation of the house, then not only
the fifty pounds extra rent per year is lost, but also that which the
Lord is obliged to withhold from his child besides, in order to teach
him the lesson; and thus year after year, by our own fault, we may have
scarcely anything to give for the work of God.

7. The next obstacle to prosperity in our calling which I now would
mention is, That children of God often use such expressions as these
with reference to their calling: "This is our busy time," or "This is
our dead time;" which implies that they do not day after day deal with
God about their calling, but that they ascribe their having much or
little to do to circumstances, or to times and seasons. That the people
of the world should do so is not to be wondered at; but that the
children of God should act thus, who in the most minute affairs of life
should seek the help of God, and deal with God about them, is a matter
of sorrow to the spiritual mind, and is altogether unbecoming saints.
But what is the result? The Lord, according to the expectations of his
children, allows them to be without employment, because they say, "This
is our dead season." "He did not many mighty works there because of
their unbelief," contains a truth which comes in here. But what is the
right way of looking at the matter? It is this: the child of God should
say, though generally about this time of the year there is little
employment to be expected, looking at it naturally, just as want of
employment is neither good for the outward nor inward man, and as I only
desire employment to serve God in my business, to have to give to those
who are in need, or help in other ways the work of God, I will now give
myself to prayer for employment, for I can by prayer and faith as a
child of God obtain blessings from my heavenly Father, though not in the
ordinary course of things. If thus the child of God were to say and to
act, he would soon have employment in his calling, except the Lord meant
to use his time otherwise in his work, which he would point out to him.

8. A further reason why God may be obliged to resist children of God in
their business, may be this, that they with the greatest carefulness
seek to obtain persons for their shop who are considered "good
salesmen," _i. e._ persons who have such persuasive ways, as that they
gain an advantage over the customers and induce them not only to buy
articles for which they ask, whether suitable or not, but that they also
induce them to buy articles which they did not at all intend to buy when
they came to the shop. Concerning this I notice, in the first place,
that if the child of God puts his dependence upon the "good salesmen,"
let him not be surprised if his heavenly Father should be obliged to
disappoint him, because he sees his child lean upon the arm of flesh,
instead of trusting in the living God; and therefore the business does
not succeed. Further, it is altogether wrong for a child of God to
induce the customers, by means of such men or women who have a
persuasive tongue, to purchase articles whether they suit or not, and
whether they are needed or not. This is no less than defrauding persons
in a subtle way, or leading them into the sin of purchasing beyond their
means, or at least spending their money needlessly. However such sinful
tricks may be allowed to prosper in the case of a man of the world, in
the case of a child of God they will not prosper, except God allow them
to do so in the way of chastisement, whilst leanness and wretchedness
are brought into the soul. I knew a case of this kind where it was the
whole bent of the mind of a professed believer to obtain such "good
salesmen," and where even a Jew was kept outside the shop, walking up
and down, to induce persons to come in and buy; and yet that same
professed believer failed twice in his business.

9. Another evil with reference to business, and why children of God do
not get on in their calling, is, that they enter upon business often
without any capital at all, or with too little. If a believer has no
capital at all, or only a very small capital, in comparison with what
his business requires, then ought he not to say this to himself: "If it
were my heavenly Father's will that I should enter upon business on my
own account, then would he not somehow or other have intrusted me with
the needful means? And since he has not, is it not a plain indication
that for the present I should remain a journeyman (or shopman, or clerk,
as the case may be)?" In a variety of ways the means might come. For
instance, a legacy might be left to him, or money might be given to him
by a brother in the Lord for that very purpose, or a brother or sister
might propose to the individual to lend him money, yet so that if he
were unable to pay it again they would not consider him their debtor.
But if in some such way the Lord did not remove the hindrance, and the
brother would still go into business, he would, through the bill system
and other things connected with the want of capital, not only bring
great distress into his mind, and subject himself to the possibility of
at last being unable to pay his creditors, whereby dishonor would be
brought upon the name of the Lord, but he likewise could not be
surprised (as he went into business contrary to the will of God, since
he pointed out to him that he was not to do so for want of means) if he
should find that he cannot get on, and that the blessing of God
manifestly is wanting. In such a case as this, if it can be done, the
retracing our steps is the best thing we can do; but often this cannot
be done, as others are involved in the matter, and then we have to make
acknowledgment of our sin, and seek God's merciful help to bring us into
a right position.

10. But suppose all these nine previous points were attended to, and we
neglected _to seek God's blessing upon our calling_, we need still not
be surprised if we met with difficulty upon difficulty, and could not
get on at all. It is not enough that we seek God's help for that which
manifestly is of a spiritual character; but we should seek his help and
blessing by prayer and supplication for all our ordinary concerns in
life, and if we neglect doing so we shall surely suffer for the neglect.
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own
understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths." Prov. iii. 5, 6.

Though these few remarks are written by one who never was in business
himself, yet the truths therein set forth have been learned by him in
the school of God, and he has had them abundantly confirmed through his
pastoral labors during the last fifteen years and a half. [This was
written in 1845.]




CHAPTER XVII.

REAPING BOUNTIFULLY.

1845-1846.

    AN UNEXPECTED REQUEST--DELIBERATION--A GREAT
    UNDERTAKING--RELIANCE ON THE RESOURCES OF THE LIVING GOD--AN
    ANSWER EXPECTED AND RECEIVED--PRAYER FOR FAITH AND
    PATIENCE--FURTHER PROOFS OF DIVINE FAVOR--THE BLESSEDNESS OF
    DEVISING LIBERAL THINGS.


I began the service of caring for children who are bereaved of _both_
parents, by death, born in wedlock, and are in destitute circumstances,
on Dec. 9, 1835. For nearly ten years I had never had any desire to
_build_ an Orphan House. On the contrary, I decidedly preferred spending
the means which might come in for present necessities, and desired
rather to enlarge the work according to the means which the Lord might
be pleased to give. Thus it was till the end of October, 1845, when I
was led to consider this matter in a way in which I had never done
before.[18] The occasion of my doing so was this: On Oct. 30, 1845, I
received from a gentleman, who lived in the street where the four Orphan
Houses were, a polite and friendly letter, in which he courteously
stated to me that the inhabitants in the adjoining houses were in
various ways inconvenienced by the Orphan Houses being in Wilson Street.
He left to myself the judgment of the case.

  [Footnote 18: The reader will not fail to remark the striking
  illustration afforded in the present chapter, of the truth stated
  in Chapter XVI., that God rewards the right use of means of
  benevolence by affording the means of enlarged usefulness.--ED.]

This letter I received on Thursday morning, Oct. 30, 1845. Being very
much occupied that week, I had scarcely any time to consider the matter.
On Monday morning, however, Nov. 3, I set apart some hours for the
prayerful consideration of the subject, and after I had besought the
Lord to guide me to a right decision, I wrote down the reasons which
appeared to me to make it desirable that the Orphan Houses should be
_removed_ from Wilson Street, and also the reasons _against removing_.
As far as they are suitable for being stated in print they were these:--


I. REASONS FOR REMOVING FROM WILSON STREET.

1. The neighbors feel themselves inconvenienced by the noise of the
children in the play-hours. This complaint is neither without
foundation, nor unjust; for many persons are very much inconvenienced by
the noise of children, and those living close by the Orphan Houses must
be so during the play-hours, even though the noise be only of that kind
that one could not at all find fault with the dear children on account
of it. I should myself feel it trying to my head to live next door to
the Orphan Houses on that account. I therefore ought to do to others as
I should wish to be done by. This point had never before appeared to me
in so serious a light.

2. The greatness of the number of the inmates in the houses had several
times prevented the drains from acting properly, and thus has a few
times affected the water in one or two of the neighbors' houses. With
reference to these two reasons as it regards those living near the
Orphan Houses, these words, "Let not your good be evil spoken of," Rom.
xiv. 16, and "Let your moderation (_i. e._ yieldingness) be known unto
all men," Philip. iv. 5, seemed to me two important portions of the word
of God to be acted out in this matter.

But in addition to the reasons for removing the Orphan Houses from
Wilson Street on account of the unavoidable occasional inconvenience
that comes upon the neighbors, there appeared now to me, when once I was
led to consider seriously the reasons for removing the Institution from
Wilson Street, other reasons for doing so, in connection with the work
itself, which had occurred to me before, but never in so strong a light
as now, when the subject was brought more immediately before me by the
letter in which I was politely requested to remove the Orphan Houses
from Wilson Street. These reasons are:--

1. We have no proper play-grounds in Wilson Street. There is one
play-ground, which, however, is only large enough for the children of
_one house_ at a time; but as there are children in _four_ houses who
ought to have the benefit of it, we cannot arrange so that all the
children have the full benefit of that play-ground, as the meals, the
school-hours, the weather, and other hindrances interfere. The dear
orphans ought, I know, to be trained in habits of industry, but children
are children, and need to be treated as such; and they should, on
account of their health, have the full benefit of a play-ground. But
this they cannot have in Wilson Street: and to take them out into the
fields for the benefit of bodily exercise, as we have been in the habit
of doing, is often very inconvenient.

2. We have no ground for cultivation near the Orphan Houses, and hence
there must be more walking for the children, on account of using proper
means for keeping them, with the blessing of God, in health, than is in
other respects good for them; because frequent walks easily beget in
children habits of idleness, which would be especially felt when boys
are apprenticed. But this difficulty cannot be obviated by remaining in
Wilson Street, and renting a piece of land somewhere else for
cultivation; for to get the children ready and conduct them to the piece
of ground not only takes a good deal of time, but is connected with
other great inconveniences, yea, with insurmountable difficulties, so
that we found it needful to give up a small piece of ground which we
once rented for about two years for the orphan boys, at a distance of
about half a mile from Wilson Street. Thus, by removing from Wilson
Street, and obtaining premises surrounded by land for cultivation, we
should be able to procure a most important moral benefit for the
children, by having the opportunity more fully than we now have of
training them in habits of industry, besides giving to the boys
occupation which is more suitable for them than knitting, which is now
the only employment they have, besides making their beds, cleaning the
house, and attending to the cooking of their meals. Moreover, this would
be occupation in the open air, which not only would bring into exercise
the use of their limbs, but also make walking for the sake of health
almost entirely needless.

3. If we were to remove from Wilson Street, and obtain premises in the
country, we might have all the washing done at home, which now, for want
of room, can be only done in part. Thus the girls also would have more
laborious work at home, a point of great importance for them, so that
they would not feel so much the hardships connected with going out to
service.

4. The situation of Wilson Street is _perhaps_ scarcely bracing enough
for strengthening the constitution of the orphans, most of whom, being
the offspring of very diseased parents, require a very invigorating
place of abode.

5. The present situation is _certainly_ not desirable for the teachers,
especially as, when their hours of work are over, they have no garden or
fields close to the house immediately to go into for a little
refreshment of their body; and for some of them it is too far to go to
fields, where they might have a bracing air.

6. In times of sickness we are too confined in the houses in Wilson
Street. If there were less than thirty children in each house, the
average expenses for each child would be too great, it being desirable,
as the arrangements are now, that there should not be less than three
laborers in each house; and yet, if there are thirty children in each
house, we are too full in time of sickness, as we have not a single
spare room in any of the houses. Now, though the Lord has during all
these years most mercifully helped us through such seasons, yet it has
not been without inconvenience, and without also, perhaps, having more
of the children in one room, at such times, than on account of health it
is desirable.

7. Even ordinarily, when there is no sickness, it would be desirable to
have more room.

There are no premises to be had in Bristol, or in the immediate
neighborhood, where we could have these advantages; _for I have been
looking about in all directions for this purpose during the last ten
years_. But suppose there were a large house to be had in one part of
the city, and a second a mile off, and a third and a fourth in other
directions, such houses, on account of our peculiar position in the
work, would not do. For in seasons of need the distance of the several
houses would render it very inconvenient for the laborers to meet
together for prayer, to divide the means that may be in hand, etc.
Besides, when in seasons of other peculiar difficulties, connected with
the work, I wished to meet all my fellow-laborers, there would arise
great difficulty by their being divided in different parts of the city.
It would also thus be very inconvenient to persons who wish to see the
work, to go from place to place, in order to have a view of all the
Orphan Houses. But this is not all. The more I have considered the
matter, the more am I now persuaded that no ordinary large houses, built
for private families, and therefore only calculated to accommodate, ten
or fifteen persons at most for any length of time in them, will do for
charitable institutions of any considerable size, as no ordinary house,
except built on purpose, furnishes the proper advantages of ventilation,
_a point so needful for the health of the inmates in a charitable
institution_. There seemed to me, therefore, to remain nothing but to
build premises for the purpose.


II. REASONS FOR REMAINING IN WILSON STREET.

1. God _hitherto_ has pointed out the spot most plainly. At the
commencement of the work, in 1835, no other house was to be had but No.
6 Wilson Street. Afterwards, when in 1836 the Infant Orphan House was on
the point of being opened, again I was looking about in all directions,
and saw many houses, but found none that was suitable, till all at once,
most unlooked for, the occupiers of No. 1 Wilson Street were desirous of
immediately leaving that house, and I was able thus to rent it. When in
1837 I was on the point of opening the Boys' Orphan House, I looked
about again for a house in all directions; for I knew not at that time,
what I have since learned by experience, that it was so important that
all the houses should be near together. After seeking long in vain, I at
last found a very large house, not far from Wilson Street, which I
rented; but when the occupiers of the houses in the neighborhood heard
that that house had been let for a charitable institution, they
threatened the owner with an action, which led him to request me to give
up the agreement, which, of course, I did immediately. At last, most
unexpectedly, after having looked about in vain in all directions, the
occupiers of No. 3 Wilson Street offered it to me, and I rented it for
the orphan boys. Lastly, in the year 1843, when I was led to see it to
be the will of God to go forward in this work, and to establish the
Girls' Orphan House, No. 2, for older girls, one particular feature in
the matter was, that the house No. 4 in Wilson Street had been offered
to me, without being sought after, when there had not been for about six
years one single large house to be let in that street.

[But though _hitherto_ God has pointed out Wilson Street as being the
spot where this work should be carried on, may not _now_ the time have
come for removing?]

2. Perhaps we might also rent Nos. 2, 5, and 7, in Wilson Street, and
use two out of those three houses for Orphan Houses, and one of them for
an infirmary in the case of sickness.

[But then, I said to myself, would not the objection, which the
neighbors on the opposite side of the street might make, on account of
the noise of the children in their play-hours, etc., remain? Also the
drains would be still more unsuitable, not being constructed for so many
inmates; and to alter them would be a heavy expense. The play-ground
would be still less sufficient, if two new houses were added. Lastly,
there was no reason to think that we could rent Nos. 2, 5, and 7.]

3. There are these three great objections against building: The
considerable sum which is required, and which could be spent for present
use upon the orphans. The pilgrim character of the Christian seems lost
in building. The time that it will necessarily take in making
arrangements for it.

[Do not all these objections only hold good, I said to myself, if I were
_needlessly_ to set about building? If I could rent premises, which are
really in every way suitable for the work, and I _preferred_ building,
then those objections would apply to the case; but when one is _forced_
to it, it is no more than erecting a large building because there may be
eight hundred children of God in fellowship who have been hitherto
renting a meeting-place, but for certain reasons are obliged to leave
it, and cannot rent another. Such could not be accused of needlessly
spending money in building instead of renting; nor could it be justly
said that they have _on that account_ given up the pilgrim character;
nor would it be time wasted if some individuals were to make
arrangements about the building of that meeting-place. Therefore these
three objections just mentioned, which had been _for ten years strongly
in my own mind_, were removed when once I saw plainly that nothing
remained but to build.]

After I had spent a few hours in prayer and consideration over the
subject, I began already to see that the Lord would lead me to build,
and that his intentions were not only the benefit of the orphans and the
better ordering of the whole work, but also the bearing still further
testimony that he _could_ and _would_ provide _large_ sums for those who
need them and trust in him for them; and besides, that he would enlarge
the work, so that, if I once did build a house, it might be large enough
to accommodate three hundred orphans, with their teachers and other
overseers and servants needful for the work. Concerning this latter
point, I think it important to remark, that during no period had the
number of the applications for the admission of orphans been greater
than just before I was led to think about building, so that it was quite
painful to me not to be able to comply with the wishes of all the many
persons who applied for the admission of orphans. There were many
waiting for admission, particularly orphan boys.

In the afternoon of November 3, 1845, I laid the matter before my
fellow-laborers in the church (eight in number), to get their judgment,
whether I ought not to leave Wilson Street, and to build. All judged
that I ought to leave Wilson Street, and none saw reasons against
building.

On Nov. 4, my dear wife and I began to meet for prayer about this
matter, and purposed to do so morning by morning. We asked God for
clearer light concerning the particular points connected with the
subject; and being assured that it was his will that I should build, I
began asking the Lord for means.

On Nov. 7, I judged, having considered the matter more fully, that
sufficiently large premises to furnish all needful accommodation for
three hundred children (from their earliest days up to fifteen or
sixteen years old), together with a sufficiently large piece of ground
in the neighborhood of Bristol, for building the premises upon, and the
remainder for cultivation by the spade, would cost at least ten thousand
pounds. I was not discouraged by this, but trusted in the living God.

We continued meeting for prayer morning by morning for fifteen days, but
not a single donation came in; yet my heart was not discouraged. The
more I prayed, the more assured I was that the Lord would give the
means. Yea, as fully assured was I that the Lord would do so, as if I
had already seen the new premises actually before me. This assurance
arose not from some vague, enthusiastical feeling, the mere excitement
of the moment, but, 1. From the reasons already related, and especially
from the commandment contained in Philip. iv. 5. For I saw that I should
not act according to the mind of our Lord Jesus if I did not, as soon as
I could, remove the orphans from Wilson Street, as it had been stated to
me, in the letter above referred to, that their living there was an
annoyance to some of the inhabitants in that street. 2. This assurance
that I should build an Orphan House arose further from the whole way in
which the Lord had been pleased to lead me in connection with the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad since its beginning
on March 5, 1834, _i. e._ he has been leading me forward as by an unseen
hand, and enlarging the work more and more from its commencement, and,
generally, without my seeking after it, and bringing things so clearly
before me that I could not but see that I ought to go forward. 3. Lastly
and chiefly, this, my assurance that I should build unto the Lord this
house of mercy, arose also particularly from this, that having strictly
examined my heart as to the motives for doing so, I found that, as
before God, I could say that my only motives were his honor and glory,
and the welfare of the church of Christ at large, the real temporal and
spiritual welfare of destitute orphans, and the welfare of all those who
might take care of them, in the building to be erected. And finding
that, after praying again and again about the matter, I still remained
in perfect peace, I judged it assuredly to be the will of God that I
should go forward.

On Nov. 15, brother R. C. arrived, to labor for a little while in
Bristol. I communicated to him my position with reference to having to
remove the orphans from Wilson Street, and I had his judgment also as to
its being of God that I should _build_. This dear brother's judgment
greatly encouraged me. His visit was to me of great help in this
particular, especially in stirring me up yet more to bring everything in
connection with this matter before God. He also laid it on my heart to
seek direction from God with reference to the plan of the building. He
said, "You must ask help from God to show you the plan, so that all may
be according to the mind of God."

Up to Dec. 9, thirty-five days had passed away, whilst I was day by day
waiting upon God for means for this work, and not a single penny had
been given to me. Nevertheless, this did not in the least discourage me,
but my assurance that God, in his own time and in his own way, would
give the means, increased more and more. The portion which came in
course of my meditation on the New Testament, was the beginning of the
epistle of James. More than at any period in my life was I struck with
these verses: "My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations (_i. e._ trials); knowing this, that the trying of your
faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." James i. 2-4. It was
especially the last verse, "But let patience have her perfect work,"
etc., which I found of exceeding great importance with reference to the
building of the Orphan House. It led out my soul in prayer day after
day, to ask the Lord to increase my faith, and to sustain my patience. I
had these verses so impressed upon my heart that I could not but think
that God meant particularly to bless me by them, with regard to the work
before me, and that I should especially need patience as well as faith.

On the thirty-sixth day after having begun to pray, Dec. 10, 1845, I
received one thousand pounds towards the building of the Orphan House.
This is the largest donation that I had received up to that time for the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution; but when I received it I was as calm,
as quiet, as if I had only received one shilling. For my heart was
looking out for answers. Day by day I was expecting to receive answers
to my prayers. Therefore, having faith concerning the matter, this
donation did not in the least surprise me. Yea, if five thousand pounds
or ten thousand pounds had been given to me, instead of one thousand
pounds, it would not have surprised me.

Dec. 13. On the thirty-ninth day my sister-in-law, who had been for
some weeks absent in London, and who had now returned to Bristol, told
me that she had met a gentleman in London, who, having quite recently
read with deep interest the Narrative of the Lord's dealings with me,
wished to know as many particulars about the work in my hands as he
could. Being told by my sister-in-law that I purposed to build an Orphan
Mouse, he, an architect, offered to make the plan, and superintend the
building _gratuitously_. Unsolicited, he pressed this matter upon her
with deep and lively interest. I hear also that he is a Christian. The
fact that this offer comes _unsolicited_, and from a Christian
architect, shows especially the hand of God. This is the _second_ proof
that God will help me in this matter.

Dec. 23. This is now the fiftieth day since I have come to the
conclusion to build, and the forty-ninth day since we have been daily
waiting upon God for help. Nothing more has come in since Dec. 10, not
even one penny. This morning I have been particularly encouraged by the
consideration that the Lord has sent me the one thousand pounds, and the
promise from that pious architect, whom I have never seen, and of whose
name I am as yet in ignorance, _not to mock me, but as an earnest that
he will give all that is needed_.

It seems desirable that we should have a large piece of ground, at least
six or seven acres. This piece of ground must be in the vicinity of
Bristol: 1. In order that the Orphan House may be accessible to me, as
my place at present is fixed by my other work in Bristol. 2. That the
laborers in the Institution, and the orphans may be able to attend our
meetings, at least on the Lord's day. For if meetings were held on
purpose in the Orphan House, either the laborers or the children would
not be benefited by them in that measure in which it is desirable. 3.
That the inhabitants of Bristol may have the benefit of seeing with
their own eyes this work of God, which is so manifestly his and not
mine. 4. That strangers who pass through Bristol may have easy access to
it, for the same reason. But then, such a piece of ground near Bristol,
where there is just now such an inordinate desire for building, in the
way of speculation, would cost, in all human probability, between two
and three thousand pounds. Then the building itself, however plain,
would not cost less than from six to eight thousand pounds, being for
three hundred orphans, besides all their overseers, teachers, and
assistants. In addition to this, the fitting up and furnishing the house
for all these between three and four hundred inmates would not cost less
than fifteen hundred pounds more. This is indeed a large sum of money
which I need; but my hope is in God. I have not sought after this thing.
It has not begun with me. God has altogether unexpectedly, by means of
the letter before mentioned, led me to it. Only the day before I
received the letter, I had no more thought about _building_ premises for
the accommodation of the orphans than I had had during the ten previous
years. My especial prayer is that God would continue to me _faith_ and
_patience_. If he shall be pleased to help me in faith and patience to
continue to wait on him, help will surely come.

Dec. 24. No further donation yet. But my hope in God is unshaken. He
most assuredly will help. I have on purpose not issued any circular in
connection with this matter, in order that the hand of God may be the
more manifest. To some persons residing in or out of Bristol I have
spoken about my intention of building, when conversation led to it.
Through this, if the Lord please, he can make it known to others, and
thus send means for the building fund. Or he can send in such an
abundance of means for the work which is already in existence, that
from that abundance there might be a rich surplus towards the building
fund. But howsoever God may help, I do desire to see his hand made most
manifest. There will be, no doubt, many trials connected with this
enlargement of the field of labor (for if with the one hundred and
thirty orphans there has been so much trial of faith, what is to be
expected when the number is three hundred); and therefore I desire to
see as clearly as daylight that God himself is leading me onward.

Dec. 29. This is the fifty-sixth day since I came to the conclusion to
build, and the fifty-fifth since I have been day by day waiting upon God
concerning it. Only that one donation had come in till this evening,
when I received fifty pounds. This donation is exceedingly precious to
me, not only because I am sure it is most cheerfully given, nor even
because of its largeness, but because it is another precious proof that
God will bring about the matter, else he would not give me these
earnests. All _my_ business therefore is, to continue in faith and
patience to wait upon God. My assurance has been more and more
increasing that God will build for himself a large Orphan House in this
city, to show to the inhabitants, and to all who may read and hear about
it, what a blessed thing it is to trust in him. Of late I have seen, by
God's grace, more and more how entirely unworthy I am of being used by
God for this glorious and honorable service, and I can only say: "Lord,
here is thy servant, if thou art pleased to use such a one as I am."

Dec. 30, 1845. This morning I came, in course of my reading, to the
commencement of the book of Ezra. I was particularly refreshed by the
two following points contained in the first chapter, in applying them to
the building of the Orphan House: 1. Cyrus, an _idolatrous_ king, was
used by God to provide the means for building the temple at Jerusalem:
how easy therefore for God to provide ten thousand pounds for the
Orphan House, or even twenty or thirty thousand pounds, if needed. 2.
The people were stirred up by God to help those who went up to
Jerusalem. Thus it is a small matter for him to put it into the hearts
of his children to help me, in desiring to build this house of mercy
unto his name. This meditation I had before breakfast. After family
prayer in the morning, I had again my usual season for prayer about the
building, and at this time it was particularly coupled with thanksgiving
for the fifty pounds received last evening, and with entreating
blessings on the donor. I was now looking out for more, as I am doing
day by day, when this afternoon I received from a person at Clevedon two
shillings sixpence, from her grandson sixpence, and from the sister in
the Lord who brought the money the change which she did not wish back,
being another sixpence. These donations, though small, are nevertheless
very precious to me, as I take them as further proofs out of the hands
of God that he will most assuredly bring this thing to pass. This
evening I received one thousand pounds towards the building fund. When I
received this donation I was as calm, yea as perfectly calm, as if I had
received a single penny, because, by God's grace, I have faith in him,
and therefore I am looking for answers to my prayers, and am sure that
God will give every shilling that is needed.

January 2, 1846. This evening I received from Bideford eleven shillings
towards the building fund.

Jan. 3. One of the orphans gave sixpence.

Jam 6. Received a little bag made of foreign seed, and a shell flower,
to be sold for the building fund. The sister who sent these articles
wrote to me, that the moment she heard of my intention of building an
Orphan House, this text was before her mind: "Who art thou, O great
mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain." Zech. iv. 7.
Also one of the orphans sent fourpence.

Having asked the Lord to go before me, I went out to-day to look for a
piece of ground. The armory which is to be sold had been several times
mentioned to me as a suitable place. I did not think so, yet I thought I
ought at least to look at it. Having seen it and been confirmed in my
judgment about its unsuitableness, I asked the Lord whether I should
turn towards the city or towards Stapleton. I felt led to go towards the
city, and saw immediately after some fields near the armory. After
having made inquiry to whom they belonged, I have been led to write this
evening to the owner of them, asking him whether he is disposed to sell
them, etc. I am now quietly waiting the Lord's pleasure. If his time is
come to answer our requests as to a suitable piece of land, I shall be
glad; if it is not yet come, I desire that "patience may have her
perfect work, being perfect and entire, wanting nothing."

Jan. 8. This evening I received a reply to my letter. The owner of those
fields writes, that, if he did sell them, it would be only for building
land, and therefore they will be too dear.

Jan. 9. Went this morning once more to see those fields, which seem very
suitable. Met there Mr. L., a land agent, who told me that they would be
nearly a thousand pounds per acre, and therefore too dear. I asked Mr.
L. to inform me if he should hear of any suitable land for sale.

Jan. 31. It is now eighty-nine days since I have been daily waiting upon
God about the building of an Orphan House. The time seems to me now near
when the Lord will give us a piece of ground, and I told the brethren
and sisters so this evening, after our usual Saturday evening prayer
meeting at the Orphan House.

Feb. 1. A poor widow sent to-day ten shillings.

Feb. 2. To-day I heard of suitable and cheap land on Ashley Down.

Feb. 3. Saw the land. It is the most desirable of all I have seen. There
was anonymously put into an orphan box at my house a sovereign, in a
piece of paper, on which was written, "The New Orphan House."

Feb. 4. This evening I called on the owner of the land on Ashley Down,
about which I had heard on the 2d, but he was not at home. As I,
however, had been informed that I should find him at his house of
business, I went there, but did not find him there either, as he had
_just before_ left. I might have called again at his residence at a
later hour, having been informed by one of the servants that he would be
sure to be at home about eight o'clock; but I did not do so, judging
that there was the hand of God in my not finding him at either place:
and I judged it best therefore not to force the matter, but to "let
patience have her perfect work."

Feb. 5. Saw this morning the owner of the land. He told me that he awoke
at three o'clock this morning and could not sleep again till five. While
he was thus lying awake his mind was all the time occupied about the
piece of land respecting which inquiry had been made of him for the
building of an Orphan House, at my request; and he determined with
himself that, if I should apply for it, he would not only let me have
it, but for one hundred and twenty pounds per acre, instead of two
hundred pounds, the price which he had previously asked for it. How good
is the Lord! The agreement was made this morning, and I purchased a
field of nearly seven acres, at one hundred and twenty pounds per acre.

Observe the hand of God in my not finding the owner at home last
evening! The Lord meant to speak to his servant first about this matter,
during a sleepless night, and to lead him _fully_ to decide before I had
seen him.

Feb. 8. I wrote the day before yesterday to the architect, who has
offered his help gratuitously.

Feb. 11. Received from a sister in the Lord five pounds. Received also
from the architect the following reply to my letter:--

    MY DEAR SIR:

    It will afford me a gratification, beyond what I can communicate
    by letter, to lend you the helping hand in the labor of love you
    are engaged in, and I shall esteem it a very great privilege
    being allowed to exercise my abilities as an architect and
    surveyor in the erection of the building you propose to erect
    for the orphans. I really do mean what I say, and, if all is
    well, by the blessing of God, I will _gratuitously_ furnish you
    with plans, elevations, and sections, with specification of the
    work, so that the cost may be accurately estimated. I will also
    make you an estimate and superintend the works for you
    _gratuitously_, etc.

The total amount which has been given for the building fund, up to June
4, 1846, is two thousand seven hundred and ten pounds three shillings
five and a half pence. This is only a small part of what will be needed;
but, by the grace of God, I am in perfect peace, being fully assured
that God in his own time will send the whole sum which is required. Many
and great have already been the exercises of faith and patience since I
first began to give myself to prayer about this work, and still greater
they may be, before it is accomplished; but God, in the riches of his
grace, will help me through them all. It is now (June 4, 1846) two
hundred and twelve days since I first began to pray about this work, and
day after day, since then, have I been enabled to continue to wait upon
God, and I am more than ever assured that, not withstanding all my
exceeding great unworthiness, God will condescend to use me, to build
this house. Had it been the excitement of the moment, the difficulties
which have already come upon me in connection with this work (and which
are not stated here, on account of their occupying too much room) would
have overwhelmed me; but as God himself, I trust, led me to this work,
so he has helped me, and does help me, and I doubt not will help me to
the end.

The house is intended to be built so as to accommodate one hundred and
forty orphan girls above seven years of age, eighty orphan boys above
seven, and eighty male and female orphans from their earliest days, till
they are seven years old, together with all the overseers and teachers,
etc., that may be needed. The infants, after having passed the age of
seven, will be removed into the different departments for older boys and
girls.

Before leaving this period, it may be proper to recur to the following
miscellaneous points, respecting the Scriptural Knowledge Institution
for Home and Abroad, with reference to the period from July 14, 1844, to
May 26, 1846.

1. During the whole of this period four day schools, with 278 children
in them, were _entirely_ supported by the funds of the Institution.
Three day schools besides were _assisted_. The number of the children
that were taught in the day schools, entirely supported by the funds of
the Institution, from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1846, amounts to 3,983.
During the period from July 14, 1844, to May 26, 1846, £628, 19s.
4¾d. was spent on all the schools, which were either entirely or in
part supported by the funds of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution.
Further: during this period there were also entirely supported a Sunday
school with 80 children, and an adult school with 60 persons attending
it. The total number of the adult scholars who received instruction,
from the formation of this Institution to May 26, 1846, is 1,146.

2. During this period were circulated 269 Bibles and 171 Testaments; and
5,079 Bibles and 3,528 Testaments were circulated from the commencement
of the work up to May 26, 1846. From July 14, 1844, to May 26, 1846,
£40, 7s. 10d. was expended of the funds of the Institution on this
object.

3. From July 14, 1844, to May 26, 1846, was laid out for foreign and
home missions the sum of £595, 7s. 9d. During no period previously was
so much of the funds of this Institution spent on missionary work, which
arose from the fact that the more I corresponded with brethren who
labored in the word and doctrine in foreign lands, the more I saw how
much they stood in need of assistance, and thus, my heart having been
led out in prayer to God on their behalf, that he would be pleased to
send me means, whereby I might be able to assist them, he was pleased to
do so. This led me to the purpose, as God should give me grace, to be
still more mindful of them in future, and to seek to be able still more
to assist them. The same was the case with regard to those brethren who
labor in England, but who have no salary or stipend, but trust in the
living God for the supply of their daily necessities; I did long to help
such brethren, and had no doubt that God would enable me to do so.

4. There was laid out for the circulation of tracts from July 14, 1844,
to May 26, 1846, the sum of £56, 6s. 9½d., for which 52,003 such
little publications were bought, which, with 5,315 in hand on July 14,
1844, makes 57,318, of which number 40,565 were circulated. The total
number circulated from Nov. 19, 1840, to May 26, 1846, amounts to
99,647.

5. There were received into the four Orphan Houses, from July 14, 1844,
to May 26, 1846, 30 orphans, who, together with those who were in the
four houses on July 14, 1844, make up 151 in all.

On May 26, 1846, there were 121 orphans in the four houses. Besides
this, six apprentices were still supported by the funds of the
Institution, so that the total number was 127. The number of the
orphans who were under our care from April, 1836, to May 26, 1846,
amounts to 213.

I notice further the following points in connection with the Orphan
Houses.

1. _Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by
me_, the sum of £13,275, 6s. 9¾d. was given to me _as the result of
prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1846.
This sum includes the £2,710, 3s. 5½d. which, up to June 4, 1846, was
given towards the building fund. (It may be interesting to the reader to
know that the total amount which was given as free contributions, for
the other objects, from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1846,
amounts to £4,833, 18s. 10¾d.; and that which came in by the sale of
Bibles and tracts, and by the payments of the children in the day
schools, amounts to £2,097, 18s. 2½d.) 2. Besides this, also a great
variety and number of articles of clothing, furniture, provisions, etc.,
were given for the orphans, as has been stated in the printed Reports.
The total expenditure for the orphans from July 14, 1844, to May 26,
1846, was £2,732, 14s. 1½d., and for the other objects, £1,325, 7s.
7¼d.

In conclusion, I cannot but mention to the praise of the Lord concerning
this period, that four of the Sunday-school children were admitted to
communion. Likewise three more of the orphans were received into church
fellowship; so that up to that time, altogether, thirty-two of the
orphans had been admitted. I also mention with peculiar joy, and as a
matter for thankfulness, that of those who were apprenticed or sent out
to service, from July 14, 1844, to May 26, 1846, ten were believers,
most of whom had been for several years in fellowship before they were
sent out to service. But whilst we desire to receive these instances as
precious encouragements from the Lord to continue our service, we cannot
but believe, judging from the many prayers the Lord gives us for the
children and adults under our care and instruction, that that which we
_see_ is but an earnest of a far larger harvest in the day of Christ's
appearing.

Dec. 31, 1844. Since brother Craik and I came to Bristol, 982 believers
have been received into communion. During this year 73 have been
received.

The Lord has been pleased to give me during this year £267, 6s. 9d. To
this is to be added that for the first two months and six days of this
year, my expenses, and those of my dear wife, during our stay in
Germany, were met, as also our travelling expenses back, as stated in
another part of my Narrative. Also during the whole of this year a
Christian lady gave to our dear child board and schooling without any
remuneration, a present worth to us not less than fifty pounds. On this
point I cannot help making a few remarks: I had clearly seen it to be
the will of God that my daughter should be brought up at school, and not
at home. My reasons for it were these: 1. My dear wife, though well
qualified to instruct our daughter, so far as knowledge goes, was
unable, on account of being engaged as my wife in a variety of things
connected with the Lord's service, to give herself uninterruptedly to
this work; and to do it partially we judged to be injurious to our
daughter. 2. I had seen instances in which a home education for an only
child had turned out very badly. 3. I judged that the mixing with other
children would be beneficial to our daughter, provided that intercourse
was under proper oversight; as thus a child is in early life introduced
into a little world, and things do not all at once come upon a young
person, when at last obliged to leave the parental roof. 4. But that
which most of all led me to this decision was, that as in the church of
Christ the Lord has qualified the members of the body for the
performance of certain work, and all have not the same gift and service,
so, in the same way, certain believers are called and qualified above
others for instructing children, and give themselves to this particular
service, and that, therefore, I ought to make use of the qualifications
of such, and of their having given their whole time to this particular
service. These reasons led us to place our daughter at school, instead
of educating her at home, and we have never had cause to regret the step
we took, but, on the contrary, have had abundant reason to praise God
for it. I have purposely made these remarks, as I am fully aware that
some believers have different views on this subject, and I desire to
serve them with the measure of light and experience I have obtained.

After our daughter had been at school for half a year, I asked for the
account, when it was stated to me by the Christian lady in whose
establishment she was that she had a pleasure in educating her
gratuitously. However, as I pressed the matter, I obtained the account.
It was paid, but the exact sum was returned to me anonymously, which, of
course, I found out at once to be from the Christian sister at whose
school my daughter was. From that time I could never more obtain the
account, though my dear child was about six years longer at school. I
refer to this point for this especial reason: God had laid it on my
heart to care about poor destitute orphans. To this service I had been
led to give myself; he, in return, as a recompense, even for this life,
took care that my own beloved child should have a very good education,
free of expense to me. I was able and well able to pay for her
education, and most willing to do so; but the Lord gave it gratuitously;
thus also showing how ready he is abundantly to help me, and to supply
my wants.

    Having learned that the brethren in Germany were led away by
    false teachers, and having received, in answer to prayer, five
    hundred pounds, for the expenses of his journey thither, Mr. M.
    left Bristol July 19, 1845, and, after laboring in word and
    doctrine in Germany, he returned to Bristol Oct. 11, 1845.

Perhaps the reader may ask, What has been the result of this labor in
Germany? My reply is, God only knows. The day of Christ will declare it.
Judging from the constant labor in prayer during eight months before I
went the second time, and day by day while I was on the Continent, and
day by day for a long time after my return, I am warranted to expect
fruit, and I do expect it. I expect abundant fruit in the day of
Christ's appearing. In the mean time my comfort is that two hundred and
twenty thousand tracts have been circulated, many of which, through the
providence of God, found their way not only into the darkest places of
the continent of Europe, but went also to America and Australia.
Further: four thousand copies of my Narrative, in German, are almost all
circulated. And, again, the publishing of my Narrative in German led me
to do the same in French, which was accomplished about three years
later. Further: these tracts were reprinted at Hamburg and at Cologne,
and are circulated by other Christians; in addition to which, my having
published them in Germany led me to get them stereotyped in England, and
they continue to be circulated in many countries.

December 31, 1845. There have been received into communion 53 during
this year, and 1,055 since the commencement of our coming to Bristol.

During this year the Lord has been pleased to give to me £433, 19s.
1¾d. To this is to be added that my dear child had again during the
whole of this year her education free at a boarding-school, as stated at
the close of the last year, whereby I saved about fifty pounds. Also my
travelling expenses to and from Germany, and other expenses connected
with my service in Germany, were paid out of the £500 pounds to which
reference has been made. Adding these two items to £433, I had at least
£500.

April 29, 1846. To-day my beloved wife and myself had the inexpressibly
great joy of receiving a letter from our beloved daughter, while we are
staying in the Lord's service at Chippenham, in which she writes that
she has now found peace in the Lord Jesus. Thus our prayers are turned
into praises. About eighteen months before this I began especially to
pray for the conversion of my dear child, and the Lord soon after seems
to have begun to work in her heart.




CHAPTER XVIII.

FAITH CONFIRMED BY PROSPERITY.

1846-1848.

    THE SPIRIT OF SUPPLICATION BESTOWED AND PRAYER ANSWERED--THE
    TIME OF MAN'S NEED AND OF GOD'S BOUNTY--FAITH NOT
    SHAKEN--DEALING ONLY WITH GOD--THE NEEDED AMOUNT
    FURNISHED--PERPETUAL "NEED"--NOT WEARY IN GOD'S WORK--JOY IN
    ANSWERED PRAYER--FOUR REQUESTS GRANTED--"CONTINUING INSTANT IN
    PRAYER"--THE BUILDING COMMENCED--PERSONAL HISTORY--A MARKED
    DELIVERANCE.


    In the following chapter, Mr. Müller has grouped together, under
    the appropriate heads, the leading events connected with each of
    the departments of the work of the Lord in his hands.


I. ASSISTANCE TO THE MISSIONARY LABORERS.

During no former period since undertaking to send aid to laborers at
home and abroad was I intrusted by the Lord with such large sums as
during the one to which this chapter refers. I had never had more need
of pecuniary supplies than during those two years, on account of the
many pressing calls; but, at the same time, I had the exceeding great
joy and privilege of being able to respond to them in such a way as I
had never before been allowed to do. These remarks apply to all the
various objects of the Institution, but especially to the supplies for
brethren who labor at home and abroad in word and doctrine, without
being connected with any society, or without having any regular salary
for preaching the word.

On May 26, 1846, after the accounts had been closed, a check for one
hundred pounds was given to me, the application of which was left to my
disposal. I put half of the amount to the fund for these objects, and
half to the orphan fund. When the accounts were closed, there was
ninety-one pounds four shillings elevenpence three farthings in hand for
these objects, to which this fifty pounds was added; therefore I began
this period with more means than I had had in hand at any time
previously at the beginning of a fresh period; and as was its beginning,
so was the continuance. It has often struck me that one especial reason
why, on the whole, I was allowed to have so little trial with regard to
means for the work during those two years, in comparison with former
times, may have been, that thereby the Lord would say that he was
willing to give what would be needed, when once the new Orphan House
should be built, though the expenses would be about two thousand five
hundred pounds a year more than they were before.

June 4, 1846. To-day was given to me, _just when I rose from my knees_,
after having asked the Lord for more means, especially for missionary
purposes, the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds, with the request to
use of it fifty pounds for the orphans, fifty pounds for laborers in
England, and fifty pounds for laborers abroad.

From the commencement of this Institution, on March 5, 1834, it had been
my desire to employ part of the funds, with which I might be intrusted,
in aiding missionary brethren in foreign lands, who are not supported by
any regular salary; and for several years I had likewise had the desire
to assist brethren, laboring in similar circumstances, in Great Britain
and Ireland. The Lord also had given me the great privilege to assist
such brethren more or less during the time that this Institution had
been in operation; but especially he began during the two years to which
this chapter refers to allow me to do so in a far greater degree than
before. I knew it to be a fact that many brethren who preach the word,
without having any salary for doing so, or property to live upon, were
in need. Now it might be said that such brethren ought to trust in God;
that, if they preach Jesus as the only hope for the salvation of
sinners, they ought to set them a good example by trusting themselves in
God for the supply of their temporal necessities, in order that
unconverted persons thereby might be led to trust in the Lord Jesus
alone for the salvation of their souls. This is true, quite true.
Preachers of the precious good news of salvation to every sinner who
puts his trust in the merits of the Lord Jesus, ought indeed themselves
to depend upon God, their Lord and Father, for the supply of their
temporal necessities; but I also felt that I, as their brother, ought to
seek to help them as far as lay in me. To this I set myself more than
ever after the beginning of the year 1846, as I knew, that, from
particular causes, there was an especial call to help such brethren; and
as my own means would go but a little way, I gave myself to more earnest
prayer than ever for such brethren. The result was, that, during the two
years of this period, the Lord so answered my _daily_ supplications with
regard to this particular, that I was honored to send nearly three times
as much to home and foreign laborers as during any previous period of
the same length. One thousand five hundred and fifty-nine pounds eleven
shillings sixpence was spent in this way, by which twenty-one brethren
were assisted who labored in foreign lands, and nineteen who labored in
Great Britain and Ireland. Large as this sum is, in comparison with
what I had been able to do in this particular in former years, yet it is
small, very small, in comparison with what my heart desired to be able
to do for these forty brethren. It has frequently, yea almost always, so
happened, that the assistance which God has allowed me to send to such
brethren has come to them _at a time of great need_. Sometimes _they had
no money at all left_. Sometimes _even their last provisions were almost
consumed_, when I sent them supplies. Some of them are fathers of large
families, or have sickly wives and children; some were once well off in
this world, but for Christ's sake have become poor; and some have had
for Christ's sake their all taken from them. Is it not an honor to help
such brethren? I could fill hundreds of pages by giving extracts from
the letters of the dear brethren to whom I have sent help, and they
would be greatly to the edification of the reader; but I do not feel
free to do so. As I have not only been laboring for these brethren in
prayer that God would intrust me with means and allow me the privilege
of helping them, but as I also have asked God to direct me especially to
send to those who might be in particular need, in case I could not help
them all; and as I have sought by an encouraging word to strengthen
their hands in God; I have great reason to believe that these dear
brethren have not only been helped by these pecuniary supplies in a
temporal point of view, but also that the fact of God sending them help
in their extremity has tended to refresh and strengthen their hearts,
and to lead them more and more to trust in him.

March 7, 1847. Often of late had I entreated the Lord that he would be
pleased to condescend to use me still further as a steward, in allowing
me to send help to the many dear brethren whom I know laboring at home
and abroad without any salary, the need of many of whom I knew. Under
these circumstances I received this morning one hundred and fifty
pounds, with the following lines:--

    DEAR BROTHER:

    I have great pleasure in sending you one hundred pounds on
    account of laborers in the Lord's vineyard at home and abroad,
    and fifty pounds for other work in your hands.

         Yours very affectionately,
                                    *  *  *

April 5. I have been praying day by day, ever since I was able during
the last month to send about one hundred and thirty pounds to home and
foreign laborers, that the Lord would be pleased soon again to give me
means for them, on account of their great need; indeed, all our means
were so exhausted, that I had only just enough for to-morrow evening to
meet the weekly expenses connected with the six day schools, when this
morning I received one hundred and twenty-five pounds for these objects.
Almost immediately after this donation had been given to me, I received
a letter from Demerara about the great need among the brethren who labor
there, by which intelligence the seasonable help just received has
become still more precious to me.

May 26, 1848. By the Lord's faithful love I have been enabled to meet
all the heavy expenses connected with _these objects_ during the last
two years, amounting to nearly two thousand and six hundred pounds, and
at the same time owe no one anything, and have a balance of five pounds
nineteen shillings seven pence halfpenny left in hand.


II. THE SUPPORT OF THE ORPHANS.

Jan. 20, 1847. For the whole of this period since May 26, 1846,
therefore nearly eight months, when the accounts were closed, we have
had always an abundance of means, and for the greater part of the time
about two hundred pounds in hand. The sum of one thousand sixty-five
pounds has come in for the orphans in less than eight months, to which
is to be added the balance of eighty-five pounds four shillings
ninepence three farthings in hand when the accounts were closed.
Invariably I have thus been able to give to the matrons of the four
Orphan Houses the money in advance, which was required for the
necessities of one week. But now, after having paid away last evening
forty-five pounds five shillings for the housekeeping of a week in
advance and for other expenses, the money which remains in hand is
needed for rent, and oatmeal, which has been ordered from Scotland. This
morning therefore I gave myself particularly to prayer with regard to
means for present use for the orphans. How blessed to have the living
God to go to! Particularly precious to know him in these days of
wide-spread distress! Potatoes are too dear for food for the orphans at
this time. The rice, which we have substituted instead of them, is twice
as dear as usual; the oatmeal more than twice as dear, and the bread one
half dearer than usual. But the riches of God are as great as ever. He
knows that our expenses are great. He knows that a little will not do in
these days, when provisions are so dear, as there are about one hundred
and fifty persons to be provided for, including teachers and
apprentices. My soul is at peace.--_Evening._ About noon I received from
a pious physician the following note, with a check for five pounds:--

    MY DEAR SIR:

    I send you something towards buying bread for the orphans. The
    dearness of food must be felt by many; but the Lord in judgment
    is nevertheless gracious. He will sustain. I am your sincere
    friend and well-wisher,
                             * * * *

March 9. This evening, Tuesday, I find that since last Tuesday evening
again forty-four pounds one shilling sixpence three farthings has come
in. How good is the Lord in helping me week after week through the heavy
expenses, especially in this season of deep distress and dearness of
provisions! To his praise I can say we have lacked nothing all this
winter. Whilst preparing these extracts from my journal for the press, I
remember to have heard the following remarks made with reference to the
time about which I am just now writing, I mean the season of dearth
during the winter of 1846-7: "I wonder how it is now with the orphans?
If Mr. Müller is now able, to provide for them as he has, we will say
nothing." When I heard such like remarks I said nothing except this: "We
lack nothing;" or, "God helps us." Should this fall into the hands of
any who have had such thoughts, let them remember that it is the very
time for _faith_ to work, when _sight_ ceases. The greater the
difficulties, the easier for _faith_. As long as there remain certain
natural prospects, faith does not get on even as easily (if I may say
so) as when all natural prospects fail. It is true that during the time
of the dearth our expenses were considerably greater than usual; it is
also true that many persons, who otherwise might have given, were unable
to do so, or had their surplus directed into other channels, such as
Ireland, etc.; but the gold and silver are the Lord's. To him we made
our prayer. In him we put our trust. And he did not forsake us. _For we
went as easily through that winter as through any winter since the work
had been in existence._ Nor could it be otherwise; for God had at this
very time an especial opportunity of showing the blessedness of trusting
in him. Seek, dear reader, more and more to put your trust in him for
everything, and you will even concerning this life find it most precious
so to do.

March 10. I was able, last evening, to meet most comfortably all the
expenses for the coming week, yet we had then nothing left, as I put by
the rest of the money, that we might not get into debt with regard to
the rent, the expenses of the apprentices, etc. When now there was again
nothing left for future housekeeping expenses, a Christian lady at a
considerable distance informed me by this morning's post that she has
paid into the hands of Messrs. Stuckey & Co. of Bristol, my bankers, the
sum of one hundred pounds for my use for the benefit of the orphans. By
the same post I have received also ten shillings from Droitwich. The
Lord's holy name be praised for this seasonable help!

May 11. This evening I have been able to meet all the expenses connected
with housekeeping during the coming week, through what has come in since
May 4, but at the same time I have nothing left. Hitherto the children
have lacked nothing. Never were provisions nearly so dear since the
commencement of the work as they are now. The bread is almost twice as
much as eighteen months ago, the oatmeal nearly three times as much as
formerly, the rice more than double the usual price, and no potatoes can
be used on account of the exceeding high price.

May 30. Lord's-day morning. I have just now received, in our great need,
when there was not sufficient in hand to meet the necessities of
to-morrow, six pounds six shillings, from a Christian gentleman of title
at Zurich in Switzerland, a distance of about one thousand miles. What a
most seasonable help! Thus I am able to send all the remainder of the
supplies which are needed till Tuesday evening.

In these days of straitness the question would naturally arise, If, when
you have only to care for one hundred and thirty orphans, you are so
poor, what will you do when there are three hundred, for whom you are
just on the point of building a house? And, further, Is it not an
indication not to increase the work, seeing you are now so poor with
only about one third of the number of orphans which you purpose to
receive into the new Orphan House? I am not tried, however, with such
thoughts; for I know that, 1. Only for the trial of my faith, as
heretofore, the Lord allows me now again to be poor. Never at any time
have the expenses been so great for the work as from May 26, 1846, to
May 26, 1847; but also never has so much come in in the same space of
time during any other period of this work. 2. It is for the profit of
the church at large that I have now again to pass through these days of
poverty. 3. It is as easy for the Lord to supply me with all the means
that the work will require when once the new Orphan House is opened, as
it is for him to give me what I need now, though the expenses in all
likelihood will then be two thousand five hundred pounds a year more
than they are at present.

July 13. The proceeds of an orphan box from Stafford, four pounds seven
shillings sixpence. The friend who sent the money wished to know whether
it arrived in a time of need. I have had many similar requests, to which
I can reply nothing, or say at the most that the answer may be learnt
from the next Report. It will be easily perceived, on reflection, that
if I said it came seasonably, that would imply we had little or nothing
at all in hand, and what would that again mean but this, "As our
expenses are so great, that which you have now sent will be soon gone
again, and therefore send us some more, or get some friend to help us."
But by this very thing the chief object of this work, "_To show how
blessed it is to deal with God alone, and how blessed to trust in him in
the darkest moments_," would be hindered. It is also for this very
reason that I do not publish the accounts very frequently, for instance
quarterly, as I have been requested to do; but I am delighted to wait a
year, or eighteen months, or two years, or more; and even then I do not
publish them for the sake of obtaining money (though unquestionably God
has used the Reports as instruments to procure us means), but for the
benefit of the church of God, to refresh, encourage, exhort, and
instruct my brethren in Christ; and also because it is needful that from
time to time I should give a public account of the way in which the
considerable sums with which I have been intrusted have been spent.

Oct. 19. I left Bristol with my dear wife, partly because both of us
much needed change of air, and partly because I had a great desire to
labor in the word for a few weeks in Westmoreland and Cumberland. I was
not able to leave more means than enough for about three days for
housekeeping expenses. But I could not have stayed in Bristol, though
there had been nothing at all in hand; my hope was that God would help
during my absence. During all the time of my stay at Bowness in
Westmoreland, from Oct. 20 to Nov. 20, there was day by day, with the
exception of the first three days after my departure, need to wait upon
God for daily supplies for the orphans. In consequence of this, _every
donation, without exception, which was received during my absence, came
in most seasonably_. Partly on account of my health, and partly on
account of opportunities for service in Westmoreland and elsewhere, I
did not feel it right to return to Bristol sooner than I did, though
there was such great poverty; nor could I have done anything in Bristol
which I could not do in Westmoreland, as it regards procuring means,
since prayer and faith are all the means I make use of to obtain
supplies when we are in need.

Dec. 23. The need of to-day was eleven pounds. This sum the Lord gave me
thus: Last evening I received one pound, together with a pair of
trousers and gaiters, and a remnant of fustian for the orphans. But as
I knew how much there would be needed to-day, I waited further upon the
Lord this morning for help, and, in ONE MINUTE after I had risen from my
knees, I received a letter from Liverpool with ten pounds for the
orphans. The donor writes: "I have had the inclosed ten-pound note in my
drawer for some time, intending to send it to you for the orphans; but
my time is so occupied that at a suitable time when at my desk I have
overlooked it. I now, however, inclose it," etc. How seasonable this
help! How exactly _to the very shilling_ what is needed to-day! How
remarkable that _just now_ this donor in Liverpool is led to send the
ten pounds which had been, according to his own words, for some time in
his drawer for the purpose of sending it! All this abundantly proves
_the most minute and particular providence_ of God, and his readiness to
answer the supplications of his children.

Dec. 30. When this day began, I was without anything for the necessities
of the day, though I had reason to believe that several pounds would
again be required. I was therefore again looking out for fresh supplies.
Accordingly, about ten o'clock this morning, a brother in the Lord, who
had come last evening to stay for a night in my house, gave me ten
pounds, to be used as it might be most needed. To be noticed in
connection with this donation is: 1. I had, not long since, received a
donation from him. 2. This brother had generally stated how he wished
his donations to be appropriated, and they had been chiefly for
missionary purposes; but this time he left it to me to use this money,
as most needed, and therefore I could take of it what was needed for the
orphans. 3: I was now extremely poor also with regard to the funds for
all the other objects, so that I was obliged to tell the teachers of the
day schools last Tuesday evening, 28th, that if no fresh supplies came
in, I should not be able to give them their weekly salaries, as usual,
next Tuesday evening, being now poorer in this particular than I had
been for years. How kind therefore of the Lord, not only to give me this
money through this brother at this time, but also to dispose his heart
to leave the application of it to me as most needed. I took half of it
for this day's housekeeping expenses for the orphans, and half for the
school fund, for the weekly salaries of the teachers next Tuesday. I
also received further this morning a half sovereign from Droitwich. The
little that was left, after the housekeeping expenses were met, was put
by for rent and the expenses for the apprentices, and I was again
without a penny, looking out for fresh supplies for to-morrow.

Dec. 31, 1847. The last day of another year had now come. Great and many
had been the mercies of God to me this year in every way, particularly
also in connection with the orphans; but now I had again nothing for
to-day, except two shillings which are in one of the boxes in my house.
I was, however, by God's grace, able to look out for supplies for this
last day of another year also, being fully assured that the Lord would
not confound me. And thus it has been, according to my expectation; for,
before I was called on for money, I received one hundred pounds, which
was left to me to apply to any part of the Lord's service where there
seemed the most need.

Feb. 2, 1848. This morning, on my walk before breakfast, I felt myself
led out of my usual track into a direction in which I had not gone for
some months. In stepping over a stile I said to myself: "Perhaps God has
a reason even in this." About five minutes afterwards I met a Christian
gentleman who gave me two sovereigns for the orphans, and then I knew
the reason why I had been led this way.

Feb. 3. The reader might say, "_You are continually in need. No sooner
is the one demand met, than another comes. Do you not find it a trying
life, and are you not tired of it?_" My reply is, It is true I am more
or less continually in need in connection with this work. And if I were
to tell out all my heart to the reader concerning it, he would have
still more reason to say that I am continually in need. For what I have
here written is almost exclusively about the way in which God has been
pleased to supply me with _money_ for carrying on the work; but I do
deliberately state that this, much as it might appear to one or the
other, is by no means the chief thing that I stand in need of from day
to day. I will just hint at a few other things. Sickness among the
children, very difficult and tedious cases, in which, notwithstanding
all the means which are used month after month, yea, year after year,
the children remain ill. Nothing remains but either to keep them, or to
send them to the Parish Union, to which they belong, as they have no
relatives able to provide for them. The very fact of having cared for
them and watched over them for years only endears them the more to us,
and would make it the more trying to send them back to their parish.
This is a "need" which brings me to God. Here is prayer required, not
only for means which such sick children call for, but for guidance and
wisdom from on high.

Sometimes children are to be placed out as servants or apprentices. A
suitable place is needed, or else they had better remain under our care.
The obtaining of this suitable place is a "need" indeed. It is more
difficult to be obtained than money. Sometimes for many weeks have I had
to wait upon God to have this "need" supplied; but he has always at last
helped. Sometimes great has been my "need" of wisdom and guidance in
order to know how certain children ought to be treated under particular
circumstances; and especially how to behave towards certain apprentices
or servants who were formerly in the Orphan Houses. A "need" in this
respect is no small thing; though I have found that in this and in all
other matters, concerning which I was in "need," I have been helped,
provided I was indeed able to wait patiently upon God. That word,
"godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life
that now is and of that which is to come," (1 Tim. iv. 8,) I have in
times almost without number found to be true in my own experience.

Further, when one or the other of the laborers needed to leave the work
on account of health, or for other reasons, I have been at such times in
far greater "need" than when I required money for the various objects of
the Institution. I could only have such "need" supplied by waiting upon
God. I could do nothing but speak to my heavenly Father about this
matter, and he has always helped. One of the greatest difficulties
connected with this work is to obtain suitable godly persons for it; so
many things are to be taken into the account. Suitable age, health,
gift, experience, love for children, true godliness, a ready mind to
serve God in the work and not themselves, a ready mind to bear with the
many trials and difficulties connected with it, a manifest purpose to
labor, not for the sake of the remuneration, but to serve God in their
work; surely, to obtain godly persons, in whom these qualifications even
in some measure are found combined, is not an easy matter. Not that any
one will suppose me to mean that I am looking out for perfect
fellow-laborers. Not that any one will suppose that my fellow-laborers
are referred to by me as if they were without weaknesses, deficiencies,
and failings. I am myself far, very far from being without weaknesses,
deficiencies, and failings. Moreover, I never expect to find
fellow-laborers for this work who have not their weaknesses; but _this I
do mean to say_, that the work of God in my hands is of that character,
and, by God's grace, is really carried on with such a true purpose to
serve God thereby (however much I and my fellow-laborers may fail), that
it is with me a matter of deep moment to find truly suitable individuals
for it, in whom, as much as possible, the above qualifications should be
found united. And, however much there may be wanting, this is more and
more my aim, that I may obtain _such_ helpers; and hence it can be
easily perceived how great my "need" must be again and again on this
very account. I do here especially advise, that if any should apply in
future for situations in connection with this work, they would keep
these remarks before them; for, by God's grace, it is my purpose never
to give to any persons a situation in connection with the Institution,
if they are not suitable for it according to the light which God gives
me.

Further, that the laborers work happily together among themselves, and
that I go on happily in service with them; that I be their servant, on
the one hand, and yet, on the other, maintain the place which God has
given me in this work; surely, if any one carefully looks at this, he
will at once see that there is a difficulty and a "need" far greater
than any that is connected with _money_. O, how these matters lead one
to call upon God! How they continually make one sensible of one's
"need!" Truly, I am in need, in continual need. I might refer to many
more points, in connection with this work, in which I am more or less
continually in "need;" but I will only mention one. It is now many years
since I have made my boast in the living God in so public a manner by my
publications. On this account Satan unquestionably is waiting for my
halting, and if I were left to myself I should fall a prey to him.
Pride, unbelief, or other sins would be my ruin, and lead me to bring a
most awful disgrace upon the name of Jesus. Here is then a "need," a
great "need." I do feel myself in "need," in great "need," even to be
upheld by God; for I cannot stand for a moment if left to myself. O that
none of my dear readers might admire me, and be astonished at my faith,
and think of me as if I were beyond unbelief! O, that none of my dear
readers might think that I could not be puffed up by pride, or in other
respects most awfully dishonor God, and thus at last, though God has
used me in blessing hitherto to so many, become a beacon to the church
of Christ! No, I am as weak as ever. I need as much as ever to be upheld
as to faith, and every other grace. I am therefore in "need," in great
"need;" and therefore help me, dear Christian reader, with your prayers.

I allow, then, most fully that I am in continual "need." This is the
case with regard to money matters, because the work is now so large. A
few hundred pounds go but a little way. There have often been weeks when
my demands have been several hundred pounds a week, and it can therefore
easily be supposed that, even if large donations come in, they do not
last long. But whilst I allow this, I desire that the Christian reader
may keep in mind that there are other necessities, and even greater ones
than those connected with _money_. Should, however, the reader say that
he thinks "_I must find this a very trying life, and that I must be
tired of it_," I beg to state that he is entirely mistaken. I do not
find the life in connection with this work a trying life, but a very
happy one. It is impossible to describe the abundance of peace and
heavenly joy that often has flowed into my soul by means of the fresh
answers which I have obtained from God, after waiting upon him for help
and blessing; and the longer I have had to wait upon him, or the greater
my need was, the greater the enjoyment when at last the answer came,
which has often been in a very remarkable way, in order to make the hand
of God the more manifest. I do therefore solemnly declare that I do not
find this life a trying life, but a very happy one, and I am
consequently not in the least tired of it. Straits and difficulties I
expected from the very beginning. Before I began this service I expected
them; nay, the chief object of it was, that the church at large might be
strengthened in faith, and be led more simply, habitually, and
unreservedly to trust in the living God, by seeing his hand stretched
out in my behalf in the hour of need. I did, therefore, expect trials,
great trials and straits; but cheerfully, for the glory of God, and the
profit of God's dear children, did I desire to pass through them, if
only the saints might be benefited by the dealings of God with me. The
longer I go on in this service, the greater the trials of one kind or
another become; but at the same time the happier I am in this my
service, and the more I am assured that I am engaged as the Lord would
have me to be. How then could I be tired of carrying on the work of God
on such principles as I do?


III. THE NEW ORPHAN HOUSE ON ASHLEY DOWN.

Up to May 26, 1846, £2,710, 3s. 5½d. had been received toward
building the new Orphan House.

July 4, 1846. For about three months my faith and patience have been
exceedingly tried about the field which I have purchased for the
building of the orphan house, as the greatest difficulties arose about
my possessing the land after all; but, by God's grace, my heart was kept
in peace, being fully assured that if the Lord were to take this piece
of land from me _it would be only for the purpose of giving me a still
better one; for our heavenly Father never takes any earthly thing from
his children except he means to give them something better instead_. But
in the midst of all this great trial of faith I could not but think,
judging from the way in which God so manifestly had given me this piece
of land, that the difficulties were only allowed _for the trial of my
faith and patience_. And thus it was. Last evening I received a letter
by which all the difficulties were removed, and now, with the blessing
of God, in a few days the conveyance will be made out.

July 6. The reason why, for several months, there had come in so little
for the building fund, appeared to me this, that we did not need the
money at present; and that when it was needed, and when my faith and
patience had been sufficiently tried, the Lord would send more means.
And thus it has proved; for to-day was given to me the sum of two
thousand and fifty pounds, of which two thousand pounds is for the
building fund, and fifty pounds for present necessities.

It is impossible to describe my joy in God when I received this
donation. I was neither excited nor surprised; for _I look out_ for
answers to my prayers. _I believe that God hears me._ Yet my heart was
so full of joy that I could only _sit_ before God, and admire him, like
David in 2 Sam. vii. At last I cast myself flat down upon my face, and
burst forth in thanksgiving to God, and in surrendering my heart afresh
to him for his blessed service.

July 21. This morning a gentleman from Devonshire, on his way to London,
called on me. When he came I was just in prayer, having, among other
matters, brought also before the Lord the following points: 1. I had
been asking him for some supplies for my own temporal necessities, being
in need. 2. I had asked him for more means for the building fund, and
besought him to hasten the matter, on account of the inhabitants in
Wilson Street, on account of the welfare of the children and those who
have the oversight of them in the Orphan Houses, and lastly that I might
be able to admit more orphans, the number of applications being so
great. 3. I had also asked the Lord for means for present use for the
orphans, as the outgoings are so great. 4. I had asked for means for
the other objects. When I saw this gentleman from Devonshire, he gave me
twenty pounds, of which ten pounds is to be used for the building fund,
five pounds for present use of the orphans, two pounds for brother Craik
and myself, and the remaining three pounds were left to my disposal,
which I applied to the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution. Thus I received, _at the very moment that I had been asking
God_, FOUR answers to my prayers.

Nov. 19. I am now led more and more to importune the Lord to send me the
means which are requisite in order that I may be able to commence the
building. Because, 1. It has been for some time past publicly stated in
print that I consider it is not without ground that some of the
inhabitants of Wilson Street consider themselves inconvenienced by the
Orphan Houses being in that street, and I long therefore to be able to
remove the orphans from thence, as soon as possible. 2. I become more
and more convinced that it would be greatly for the benefit of the
children, both physically and morally, with God's blessing, to be in
such a position as they are intended to occupy, when the new Orphan
House is built. And, 3. Because the number of very poor and destitute
orphans, that are waiting for admission, is so great, and there are
constantly fresh applications made. Now whilst, by God's grace, I would
not wish the building to be begun one single day sooner than it is his
will; and whilst I firmly believe that he will give me, in his own time,
every shilling which I need; yet I also know that he delights in being
earnestly entreated, and that he takes pleasure in the continuance in
prayer, and in the importuning him, which so clearly is to be seen from
the parable of the widow and the unjust judge. Luke xviii. 1-8. For
these reasons I gave myself again particularly to prayer last evening,
that the Lord would send further means, being also especially led to do
so, in addition to the above reasons, because there had come in but
little comparatively since the 29th of last month. This morning between
five and six o'clock I prayed again, among other points, about the
building fund, and then had a long season for the reading of the word of
God. In the course of my reading I came to Mark xi. 24: "What things
soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them." The importance of the truth contained in this portion
I have often felt and spoken about; but this morning I felt it again
most particularly, and, applying it to the new Orphan House, said to the
Lord: "Lord, I believe that thou wilt give me all I need for this work.
I am sure that I shall have all, because I believe that I receive in
answer to my prayer." Thus, with the heart full of peace concerning this
work, I went on to the other part of the chapter, and to the next
chapter. After family prayer I had again my usual season for prayer with
regard to all the many parts of the work, and the various necessities
thereof, asking also blessings upon my fellow-laborers, upon the
circulation of Bibles and tracts, and upon the precious souls in the
adult school, the Sunday schools, the six day schools, and the four
Orphan Houses. Amidst all the many things I again made my requests about
means for the building: And now observe: About five minutes after I had
risen from my knees, there was given to me a registered letter,
containing a check for three hundred pounds, of which two hundred and
eighty pounds are for the building fund, ten pounds for my own personal
expenses, and ten pounds for brother Craik. The Lord's holy name be
praised for this precious encouragement, by which the building fund is
now increased to more than six thousand pounds.

Dec. 9. It is now four hundred days since day after day I have been
waiting upon God for help with regard to the building of the Orphan
House; but as yet he keeps me still in the trial of faith and patience.
He is still saying, as it were, "Mine hour is not yet come." Yet he does
sustain me in continuing to wait upon him. By his grace my faith is not
in the least shaken; but I am quite sure that he, in his own time, will
give me everything which I need concerning this work. _How_ I shall be
supplied with the means which are yet requisite, and _when_, I know not;
but I am sure that God will help me in his own time and way. In the mean
time I have abundant reason to praise God that I am not waiting on him
in vain; for since this day twelvemonth he has given me, in answer to
prayer, a most suitable piece of ground, and six thousand three hundred
and four pounds for the building fund, and about two thousand seven
hundred pounds for present use for the work, so that altogether I have
received, since this day twelvemonth, solely in answer to prayer, the
sum of nine thousand pounds. Surely, I am not waiting upon the Lord in
vain! By his help, then, I am resolved to continue this course unto the
end.

Dec. 22. To-day I have again a precious proof that _continuing_ to wait
upon the Lord is not in vain. During this month comparatively little had
come in for the building fund; yet, by God's grace, I had been enabled,
as before, yea, even with more earnestness perhaps than before, to make
known my requests unto God, being more and more convinced that I ought
to seek by earnest prayer soon to be able to begin the building. In
addition to this I had also especially besought the Lord to give me
means for missionary brethren, and also for brethren who labor in the
word in various parts of England and Ireland, as all my means for them
were now gone. I had also been waiting upon God for means to order a
fresh stock of tracts. I had lastly again and again besought the Lord to
give me means for the poor saints in Bristol, of whom there are many,
and whose need is now particularly great. Now to-day the Lord has
granted me precious answers to my requests concerning these various
objects, for I received this morning one thousand pounds, with these
words: "I send you some money, part of which you can apply to the
orphans and the other objects of your Institution, according to their
need, and the rest you can put to the building fund. At the present
price of provisions your expenses must be large for the orphans. Please
also take twenty-five pounds for your own need."

January 25, 1847. The season is now approaching when building may be
begun. Therefore with increased earnestness I have given myself unto
prayer, importuning the Lord that he would be pleased to appear on our
behalf, and speedily send the remainder of the amount which is required,
and I have increasingly, of late, felt that the time is drawing near
when the Lord will give me all that which is requisite for commencing
the building. All the various arguments which I have often brought
before God I brought also again this morning before him. It is now
fourteen months and three weeks since day by day I have uttered my
petitions to God on behalf of this work. I rose from my knees this
morning in full confidence not only that God _could_, but also _would_,
send the means, and that soon. Never, during all these fourteen months
and three weeks, have I had the least doubt that I should have all that
which is requisite. And now, dear believing reader, rejoice and praise
with me. About an hour after I had prayed thus, there was given to me
the sum of two thousand pounds for the building fund. Thus I have
received altogether £9,285, 3s. 9½d. towards this work. I cannot
describe the joy I had in God when I received this donation. It must be
known from experience in order to be felt. Four hundred and forty-seven
days I have had to wait upon God before the sum reached the above
amount. How great is the blessing which the soul obtains by _trusting
in God_ and _by waiting patiently_. Is it not manifest how precious it
is to carry on God's work in this way, even with regard to the obtaining
of means? From Dec. 10, 1845, to Jan. 25, 1847, being thirteen months
and a half, I have received, solely in answer to prayer, nine thousand
two hundred and eighty-five pounds. Add to this what came in during that
time for present use for the various objects of the Institution, and the
total is about twelve thousand and five hundred pounds, entirely the
fruit of prayer to God. Can it be said, therefore, with good ground,
that this way of carrying on the work of God may do very well in a
limited and small way, but it would not do on a large scale? The fact
brought out here contradicts such statements.

June 23. This day the Lord in his great goodness, by a donation of one
thousand pounds for the building fund, has again encouraged my heart
abundantly to trust in him for all that which I shall yet need to meet
the remainder of the expenses connected with the fitting up and
furnishing the new Orphan House, etc.

April 29, 1848. The total amount which I have received for the building
fund is £11,062, 4s. 11½d. This sum enables me to meet all the
expenses connected with the purchase of the piece of land and with the
erection of the house. I stated before that I did not mean to commence
the building until I had all the means requisite for it, and this
intention was carried out. It was not until I had a sufficient amount of
means to meet all the sums required for the various contractors that a
single thing was done; but when I once had as much as was required for
them, I did not consider it right to delay any longer, though I saw then
clearly, and have since seen still more clearly, that I should need yet
a considerable sum to complete the work. For whilst in every respect the
building will be most plain and inexpensive, yet, it being intended to
be the abode of three hundred orphans, with all their teachers and
overseers, it necessarily must be a very large building, and was
therefore found to be even somewhat more expensive than I had thought,
as the whole (including fittings and furniture) cannot be accomplished
for less than fourteen thousand five hundred pounds, towards which the
Lord has already given me, as stated, eleven thousand and sixty-two
pounds four shillings elevenpence halfpenny. The sum still needed is
required for all the ordinary fittings, the heating apparatus, the gas
fittings, the furnishing the whole house, making three large
play-grounds and a small road, and for some additional work which could
not be brought into the contracts. I did not think it needful to delay
commencing the building, though several thousand pounds more would be
required, as all these expenses needed not to be met till many months
after the beginning of the building.

The work of the building commenced on July 5, 1847. Six hundred and
seven days I sought the help of God day by day, before we came so far as
to be able to commence the building; yet at last he gave me the desire
of my heart.


IV. MISCELLANEOUS POINTS RESPECTING THE SCRIPTURAL KNOWLEDGE INSTITUTION
FOR HOME AND ABROAD.

1. During the whole of this period six day schools, with 330 children,
were supported by the funds of the Institution; two Sunday schools were
entirely supported by it, and a third one was occasionally assisted.
Again, four from among the Sunday-school children were, during these two
years, received into church fellowship. The total number of the children
who received instruction in the day schools of the Institution, from its
commencement up to May 26, 1848, amounted to 4,519. The number of the
adult scholars who were instructed during this period in the adult
school, which was supported by the funds of the Institution, amounted to
292; and the total number of adults who had instruction from March 5,
1834, to May 26, 1848, was 1,438. The total of the expenses connected
with all these schools, during these two years, amounted to £886, 1s.
11½d.

2. During this period were circulated 649 Bibles and 232 New Testaments.
There were circulated from March 5, 1834, up to May 26, 1848, 5,746
Bibles and 3,760 New Testaments. During this period, £74, 9s. 10d. was
expended of the funds of the Institution on this object.

3. From May 26, 1846, to May 26, 1848, was expended of the funds of the
Institution on missionary objects, £1,559, 11s. 6d., whereby 43 laborers
in the gospel, at home and abroad, were assisted.

4. During this period 64,021 tracts were circulated, and the sum of £63,
1s. 5d. was expended on this object of the funds of the Institution. The
total number of tracts circulated from Nov. 19, 1840, to May 26, 1848,
amounted to 163,668.

5. There were received into the four Orphan Houses, from May 26, 1846,
to May 26, 1848, 51 orphans, who, together with those who were in the
four houses on May 26, 1846, made up 172 in all.

On May 26, 1848, there were 122 orphans in the four houses. The number
of the orphans under our care from April, 1836, to May 26, 1848, was
264. The total amount of expenditure in connection with the support of
the orphans from May 26, 1846, to May 26, 1848, was £3,228, 5s. 11d.

I notice, in connection with the Orphan Houses, that _without any one
having been personally applied to for anything by me_, the sum of
£24,771, 19s. 8¾d. was given to me _as the result of prayer to God_
from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1848. This sum includes
the £11,062, 4s. 11½d., which up to May 26, 1848, had been given
towards the building fund. It may be interesting to the reader to know
that the total amount which was given as free contributions for the
other objects, from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1848, was
£7,060, 14s. 1¾d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and
tracts, and by the payment of the children in the day schools, amounted
to £2,373, 3s. 7½d.


V. PERSONAL HISTORY.

Dec. 31, 1846. During this year there have been received into fellowship
66. The Lord has been pleased to give me during this year £399, 2s. 11d.
To this is again to be added, what I have enlarged on in a former
chapter, that during the whole of this year also my daughter was, free
of all expenses, at a boarding-school, worth about fifty pounds.

In November, 1847, I had a most remarkable deliverance, which, to the
praise of the Lord, is here recorded, as it is a further illustration of
how the Lord watches over his children.

I was laboring for a little while at Bowness and Keswick in the ministry
of the word, in October and November. When at Keswick, I stayed with my
dear wife in a large boarding-house, in which, however, we were then
alone, except a single gentleman. Just before we left Keswick, on the
morning of Nov. 24, I heard that the gentleman, lodging in the same
house, had shot himself during the night, but was not quite dead. We had
not heard the report of the pistol, it being a very stormy night and the
house large. Two days after, I received from a Christian brother at
Keswick the following information respecting the transaction.

                                             KESWICK, Nov. 25, 1847.

    DEAR MR. MÜLLER:

    The tender and Almighty care of our loving Father was never more
    over _you_, and indeed over all of us, than in your stay at Mrs.
    ----'s. Mr. ---- was quite deranged for two or three days before
    you left. Without any control, he had been walking about his
    room for the last two days and nights, with loaded pistols in
    his hands. Furthermore, he had taken into his head that you were
    going to kill him. How gracious of God that he spread his wings
    over you, and over dear Mrs. Müller, so that Satan could not
    break through the fence, to hurt even a hair of your heads.
    Speaking after the manner of men, there was nothing to have
    hindered him coming into the room, where we were all at tea,[19]
    and of firing amongst us; but the Lord was our refuge and
    fortress, and preserved us from danger, which we knew not of. He
    shot himself in the neck and breast, but is not dead. He has a
    strait-waistcoat on. I assisted in cutting his clothes off, and
    in other little offices needed at such a time, and told him of
    Christ's love in dying for poor sinners. "I know it," he said.
    He shot himself the first time about three o'clock in the
    morning, and again about seven. What a scene his room presented;
    pistols lying in gore; bloody knives, lancets, and razors
    strewed about the floor, etc.

  [Footnote 19: The evening before my departure I had invited a
  number of believers to tea, to spend some time together in prayer,
  reading the Holy Scriptures, and in intercourse on spiritual
  subjects.]

I add an extract from a second letter, written by the same Christian
brother, because it shows still further how very merciful the Lord was
to us at that time, in protecting us.

    Mr. ---- is still alive, and has been removed by his friends
    into Yorkshire. It appears, insanity is in his family, his
    father being at this time in an asylum. It is evident that he
    had the pistols in his pockets, but of this no one knew until
    after the occurrence took place. I do not know what time of
    night you went to bed, but I judge it was about ten. If so, it
    was at ten o'clock Mr. ---- came down from his bedroom, after
    having been there six hours. It was a mercy you did not meet
    him, as it is plain that he had loaded pistols on his person.

Dec. 31, 1847. There have been received into fellowship, during this
year, 39; and altogether, since Mr. Craik and I began laboring in
Bristol, 1,157, besides the 68 whom we found in fellowship. During this
year the Lord has been pleased to give me £412, 18s. 8½d. To this is
again to be added the free education of my dear daughter, at a boarding
school, worth to us at least fifty pounds.

In April, 1848, I was enabled, by the help of the Lord, to complete all
the arrangements for the publication of the Narrative of the Lord's
dealings with me, in the French language; and about September of the
same year the book appeared, under the following title: "Exposé de
quelques-unes des dispensations de Dieu envers Georges Müller. Paris,
librairie Protestante, Rue Tronchet, 2."




CHAPTER XIX.

CONTINUED MERCIES.

1848-1850.

    HUMBLE BEGINNINGS--DEVISING LIBERAL THINGS--THE ORPHANS PROVIDED
    FOR--A MEMORABLE DAY--MONEY "AT INTEREST"--MEANS FROM AN
    UNEXPECTED SOURCE--THE PROGRESS OF THE NEW ORPHAN HOUSE--MEANS
    PROVIDED FOR ITS COMPLETION--INEXPRESSIBLE DELIGHT IN
    GOD--REVIEW OF THE TWO YEARS PAST.


On the 26th of May, 1848, I had on hand for the Bible, tract,
missionary, and school funds of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution,
five pounds nineteen shillings sevenpence one farthing; a sum so small,
that, without the help of God, I could not have gone on even for a few
days; for during this period our average expenditure for one single day,
merely for this part of the work, was as much as the whole balance left
in hand. Now see how God carried me through, in meeting the expenditure
of the thousands of pounds which were laid out for these objects,
irrespective of the orphan work, from May 26, 1848, to May 26, 1850.

On the very next day, after the accounts were closed, May 27, 1848, I
received from Westmoreland five pounds, being the first donation during
this period towards this part of the work, of which sum one half was
intended by the donor for the current expenses of the orphans, and the
other half for these objects. On the following day, May 28, was
anonymously put into the chapel boxes for missions one shilling
sixpence, and twopence. Now it happened so that all the expenses,
connected with these objects, during the first two days amounted only to
about three pounds, which I was able to meet by what had come in and the
balance left in hand; and on May 29 I received one hundred pounds. As
the application of this sum was left to me, I took one half of it for
the orphans, and the other half for these objects. Thus I was supplied
with means to meet the expenses which came on me the following day, May
30, when I had to pay the weekly salaries of the teachers in the day
schools.

June 9. Great has been my desire, and many have been my prayers to God,
that he would be pleased to condescend to use me still further, in
allowing me the privilege of helping brethren who labor in the word and
doctrine, at home and abroad, without any salary, as I have been able to
do but very little for them comparatively during the last four months.
Now at last, in answer to my prayers, I have received this morning one
hundred and sixty pounds for home and foreign laborers. The Lord may see
it needful, for the trial of our faith, to seem for a season not to
regard our supplications; yet, if we patiently and believingly continue
to wait upon him, it will be manifest, in his own time and way, that we
did not call upon him in vain.

July 12. My soul has been longing for further supplies for home and
foreign laborers, to whom I have sent of late all I could. Almost all
the letters which I have received from the brethren, to whom I have sent
money, have shown to me their great need. Some were in the greatest
necessity when my remittances were received by them. Under these
circumstances a donation of one hundred and seventeen pounds two
shillings sevenpence came in this morning, of which I took fifty pounds
for these objects, and sixty-seven pounds two shillings sevenpence for
the orphans.

Nov. 9. Only a few shillings were left in my hands on Tuesday evening,
the 7th instant, towards the weekly salaries of the teachers, for the
coming week. Also, almost all the tracts are again gone, and it is
nearly four weeks since I paid out the last money I had in hand for
missionary objects. As to this latter point, my heart had been
especially longing to be able to send again help to home and foreign
laborers, knowing how very great the need of many is. Thus I was
situated with regard to means, when I received to-day one thousand
pounds.

Since March 5, 1834, I have received above forty-four thousand pounds
altogether [up to May 26, 1850, only]; and so has the Lord enlarged the
work and helped me that during the last three years I have had the
privilege of paying away in his service, in connection with this work,
about twenty-five thousand pounds; nor have I had during this period, in
any one instance, to meet a payment without being previously provided by
the Lord with means for it. If it pleased the Lord to condescend to use
me further in this way, he could so order it that even a still larger
field of labor were intrusted to me, which would require still greater
sums. Truly, it must be manifest to all simple-hearted children of God,
who will carefully read the accounts respecting this Institution, that
he is most willing to attend to the supplications of his children who in
their need cry to him; and to make this manifest is the great object I
aim at, through the means of this Institution.

Jan. 2, 1850. The new year commences, even as to this part of the work,
with new mercies. There was given to me one hundred and sixty pounds, to
be used as might be most needed.

Jan. 30. During this month I had been especially led to send much
assistance to home and foreign laborers. Also in other respects the
expenses for _these_ objects had been considerable. On this account the
funds for them had been reduced to about eighty pounds when I received
this evening four hundred and fifty pounds, of which the donor kindly
wished me to take fifty pounds for my own personal expenses, to give to
brother Craik fifty pounds, and to use the other as might be most
needed.

May 3. The work is now large, the outgoings great. During the month were
again expended about five hundred pounds for the various objects of the
Institution, nor have I any prospect that the expenses will decrease;
yea, _I have no desire that they should_. I have as great satisfaction,
as much joy, in writing checks for large amounts upon my bankers, as I
have joy in paying over to them checks, or bank orders, or large notes,
which I receive from the living God, by means of donors, for this work.
For the money is of no more value to me than as I can use it for God;
and the more I can pay out for the work of God, the more prospect I have
of being again supplied by him; and the larger the sum is which I can
obtain from him, in answer to prayer only, the greater the proof of the
blessedness and the reality of this mode of dealing directly with the
living God for what I need; therefore, I say, I have as much joy in
giving out as in receiving. I have been devoting myself, for instance,
with all my might, and expending much exertion both of body and mind,
but especially by laboring in spirit to have the Orphan House filled
with children, not only that thus three hundred destitute orphans, none
of whom have either father or mother, might be lodged, boarded, clothed,
instructed, and in every way cared for, bodily, mentally, and
spiritually; _but also in order that thus large sums might be needed and
expended_, and I might have a greater call than ever to draw largely
upon the inexhaustible treasures of God. That I do not mean, in thus
speaking, to say that money so obtained by prayer may be wasted, will
scarcely need to be noticed; for if any one would obtain means from God
by prayer only, and then waste them, he would soon find that he was not
able to pray in faith for further supplies.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the accounts were closed, on May 26, 1848, I had on hand for the
orphans a balance of one pound ten shillings three and three-fourths
pence. With this amount then we began, whilst day by day above one
hundred and thirty persons were to be provided for in the four Orphan
Houses in Wilson Street.

On the very next day, after the accounts were closed, May 27, 1848, I
received from Westmoreland five pounds, half of which sum was intended
by the donor for the orphans, and half for the other objects. This
donation I took as an earnest out of the hands of the living God, that
during the whole of this period also he would provide for these many
orphans, as he had done in former years.

Nov. 9. Up to date the wants of the orphans have been supplied as
heretofore. Yesterday, only five shillings sixpence came in. To-morrow
more money will be needed for housekeeping. In this our poverty I
received this morning one thousand pounds. The money being left to my
disposal as it might be most needed, I took of it six hundred pounds for
the building fund, three hundred pounds for missionary purposes and the
circulation of Bibles and tracts, and one hundred pounds for present use
for the orphans. I have thus the means which are yet needed for this
week's housekeeping expenses, besides being able to meet other heavy
expenses which are before me next week.

Feb. 20, 1849. For three months and ten days, since Nov. 9, 1848, the
donations had always come in so that we abounded during the whole
period, there having been always fresh donations received before all the
money in hand was disbursed. The total amount that came in during this
period was four hundred and sixty-nine pounds fourteen shillings
tenpence. Now to-day there was no money in hand for advancing the amount
needed for the next week's housekeeping. All the money in hand was due
for rent, and therefore unavailable, as I never go into debt for
anything. In this our need there was given to me this afternoon the sum
of two hundred pounds, which was left to my disposal for fitting up the
new Orphan House, or for any of the objects in connection with the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution that might be in need. As, however, I
have all the means for fitting up and furnishing the new Orphan House,
as far as I know, and as there is no money in hand for the present use
of the orphans, I took one hundred pounds for that object.

March 9. The new Orphan House is now nearly ready. On this account we
have to get in large supplies for the children's clothes. Within the
last few days I have ordered thousands of yards of material for this
purpose, and thousands more will need to be ordered, besides providing a
stock of many other things. For this large sums are needed. Under these
circumstances I received to-day a donation of three hundred pounds, to
be used for the building fund, or the current expenses of the various
objects, just as it might be most required. As I judge that we have all
that is needed for the fitting up and furnishing of the house, and as
there is more in hand than usual for the missionary objects, the
circulation of Bibles and tracts, and for the various schools, and as we
have only about sixty pounds for present use for the orphans, towards
meeting all the heavy expenses before us, I took the whole of this
donation for the orphans, as the donor has kindly left the disposal of
the money entirely to me. This donation coming in just now has been an
exceedingly great refreshment to my spirit; for it is at the
commencement of the great increase of our expenses, in connection with
the three hundred orphans, instead of one hundred and twenty, like an
earnest from God that he will supply us also with means when the demands
for the three hundred will be more than twice as great as they are now.
Through this donation I have means to meet all the expense which will be
incurred in getting in for the new establishment the stores of
provisions, soap, material for clothes, haberdashery, and of the many
other articles of which it would be desirable to buy our supplies on
wholesale terms. The Lord be praised for his kindness!

June 18. To-day, as the fruit of the prayers of three years and seven
months, the children began to be moved from the four Orphan Houses in
Wilson Street, Bristol, into the new Orphan House.

June 23. Saturday Evening. This has been indeed a week of great and many
and peculiar mercies. All the orphans with their teachers and overseers
have been moved into the new Orphan House during Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday; so that there are now about one hundred and
forty persons under one roof. The Lord has most signally helped. As I
had for more than three years sought the help of God concerning all
matters connected with the new Orphan House, I did expect his help in
this particular also; but he has done beyond my expectations. Though
only the day before yesterday the last children were moved in, there is
already such a measure of order established in the house, by the help of
God, as that things can be done by the minute hands of the timepieces.
His name is to be praised for this, and my soul does magnify him for his
goodness! Also with regard to temporal supplies for the dear orphans,
the Lord has been exceedingly kind. On the second day of receiving the
children, there was sent twenty pounds. On the third day, an individual
who walked with me through part of the house said, "These children must
consume a great deal of provisions," and, whilst saying it, took out of
his pocket a roll of Bank of England notes to the amount of one hundred
pounds, and gave them to me for the orphans. On the same evening I had
also sent for the orphans a very large cask of treacle, and for their
teachers and overseers six loaves of sugar. Also a cooper made
gratuitously two large new casks for treacle. On the next day I received
information that about one thousand pounds of rice had been purchased
for the orphans, which should be sent. Besides this, several small
donations have come in. So bountifully has the Lord been pleased to help
of late, that I have not only been able to meet all the extraordinary
heavy expenses connected with moving the orphans from Wilson Street into
the new Orphan House, filling the stores of the new Orphan House, etc.;
but I have more than five hundred pounds in hand to begin housekeeping
in the new Orphan House. How true that word that those that trust in the
Lord shall not be confounded! After all the many and long-continued
seasons of great trial of faith within these thirteen years and two
months, during which the orphans were in Wilson Street, the Lord
dismisses us from thence in comparative abundance. His holy name be
praised for it!

Aug. 30. Received a fifty-pound note with these words: "I send you
herewith a fifty-pound note, half for the missions, half for the
orphans, unless you are in any personal need; if so, take five pounds
for yourself. This will be the last large sum I shall be able to
transmit to you. Almost all the rest is already _out at interest_." I
took half of this fifty pounds for the orphans, and half for
missionaries. The writer sold some time since his only earthly
possession, and sent me at different times sums of one hundred and
twenty pounds, of one hundred pounds, of fifty-five pounds, of fifty
pounds, and of twenty pounds for the work of the Lord in my hands. When
he says, therefore, "the rest is already out _at interest_," he means
that he has given it away for the Lord, which indeed both for time and
eternity is the very best way of using the means with which the Lord may
be pleased to intrust us, in so far as, considering in the fear of God
all our various claims and duties and relationships, we may do so. As
this is written for the spiritual profit of the reader, I cannot but add
to this extract from my journal under Aug. 30, 1849, that since that
time I have received other donations from the same donor, and much
larger still. He used for God the means with which he was pleased to
intrust him, and, contrary to this brother's expectation, the above
fifty pounds was not the last large donation; for it pleased God soon
after to intrust him with another considerable sum, which he again used
for the Lord. This did not at all surprise me; for it is the Lord's
order that, in whatever way he is pleased to make us his stewards,
whether as to temporal or spiritual things, if we are indeed acting as
_stewards_, and not as _owners_, he will make us stewards over _more_.

Jan. 9, 1850. To-day was sent to me from the Committee of the Cholera
Fund in Bristol, twenty pounds, which the gentlemen constituting it had
voted for the benefit of the twenty children who had lost their parents
in the cholera, and whom I had received into the new Orphan House.

I had not applied either directly or indirectly for this money; indeed,
I was reluctant even to give information as to the number of cholera
orphans whom I had received, lest there should be even the appearance as
if after all I asked for money, instead of solely trusting in the living
God. But some of the gentlemen on the committee, I understand, knowing
the fact that I had received many orphans, made such by means of the
cholera, proposed that there should be paid to the Institution a
sovereign on account of each such child whom I had received. This sum
was especially remarkable to me as a fresh proof of the numberless ways
which God has at his command for providing me with means.

I also cannot help noticing the remarkable coincidence that, at the time
that God visited this land with the cholera, in 1849, I had so much room
for the reception of orphans. The Lord was pleased to allow me the joy
and sweet privilege of receiving altogether twenty-six children, from
ten months old and upward, who lost their parents in the cholera _at
that time_, and many besides, since then, who were bereaved of their
parents through this fearful malady.

At the time when I last referred to the _progress_ of the new Orphan
House, it was being built. A part of it was already roofed in, and the
remainder was to be roofed not many weeks afterwards. But how much did
there yet remain to be done in other respects! A building so
considerable as to contain about three hundred large windows would
require, even after it was finished, an immense amount of labor to be
fitted up and furnished for three hundred and thirty persons. Then,
after this was done, the settling in of the orphans and their teachers,
and other overseers, needed still more abundant help. Further, the
obtaining of suitable helpers for this part of the work was indeed no
small matter. Lastly, though the Lord had been pleased to give me
already above eleven thousand pounds for the new Orphan House, yet I
needed several thousand pounds more, in order to bring the whole into
such a state as might render the building fit for the reception of the
orphans. And now, in looking back, and finding that I not only was
helped in _all_ these matters, but also _in every one of them_ far
beyond my largest expectations, does it not become me to say to those
who love the Lord Jesus, and into whose hands this account may fall: "O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together!" Each one
of the foregoing difficulties which still existed on the 26th of May,
1848, was so great, that if only one of them had remained, and I had not
been helped, what would have been the result? But while the prospect
before me would have been overwhelming had I looked at it _naturally_, I
was never, even for once, permitted to question what would be the end.
For as, from the beginning, I was sure _that it was the will of God_
that I should go to the work of building for him this large Orphan
House, so also, from the beginning, I was as certain that the whole
would be finished as if the building had been already before my natural
eyes, and as if the house had been already filled with three hundred
destitute orphans. I was therefore of good courage in the midst of an
overwhelming pressure of work yet to be done, and very many difficulties
yet to be overcome, and thousands of pounds yet needed; and I gave
myself still further to prayer, and sought still further to exercise
faith on the promises of God. And now the work is done, the difficulties
are overcome, all the money that was needed has been obtained, and even
more than I needed; and, as to helpers in the work, I have obtained even
beyond my expectations and prayers. Nearly seven years have passed away
(1856) since the new Orphan House was opened, and about three hundred
and thirty persons sit down in it day by day to their meals.

       *       *       *       *       *

Up to May 26, 1848, I had received altogether towards meeting the
expenses connected with the building of the new Orphan House the sum of
eleven thousand and sixty-two pounds four shillings elevenpence
halfpenny.

Aug. 19. It is this day a twelvemonth since the foundation stone of the
new Orphan House was laid, and now the building is up, and almost
entirely roofed in. Also part of the inside plastering is already done.
How can my soul sufficiently magnify the Lord for all the help which he
has been pleased to give since this day twelvemonth! As we are now so
far advanced, I have been increasingly entreating God that he would be
pleased to give me the means which are yet requisite for fitting up and
furnishing the house; for even now I am completely depending upon him
for considerable sums to accomplish this. But while much is still
needed, I have never had, by God's grace, the least misgiving as to his
willingness to give me all I need; on the contrary, I have been assured
that, when I actually required the money for the fittings and the
furniture, it would come. And now this day the Lord has again proved to
me how willing he is to act according to my faith; for there was given
to me this morning eight hundred and eighty-seven pounds, under the kind
condition that I should take of it twenty pounds for my own personal
expenses, and the rest might be used for the building fund, or the
present need of the various objects of the Institution, as it appeared
best to me.

Nov. 9. To-day the Lord has helped still more abundantly. I have
received a donation of one thousand pounds, to be used for the building
fund and the present necessities of the work generally, as the various
objects of the Institution might require it.

Jan. 17, 1849. The time is now near when further steps are to be taken
to fit up and furnish the house, as more than two thirds of the rooms
are all but ready. Under these circumstances I have prayed the more
earnestly, day by day, that the Lord would be pleased to give me the
means which are yet needed; and as my heart has been assured from the
beginning, and all through these three years and two months, since I
first began to pray about this subject, that God would in every way
help me in this work, so I have also been particularly satisfied that he
would be pleased to provide the means which may be required to meet all
the heavy expenses which yet remain to be met. Now, to-day I have had
again a precious answer to my daily supplications with reference to this
work; for I received this evening six hundred pounds, concerning which
it was desired that brother Craik and myself should each take of it
fifty pounds for ourselves; the remaining five hundred pounds was left
entirely to my disposal; yet an especial reference was made to the heavy
expenses connected with fitting up and furnishing the new Orphan House,
towards which I might, either in part or entirely, take this sum.

Feb. 12. The new Orphan House is now almost entirely finished. In six
weeks, with the help of God, all will be completed. On this account I
have been during the last fortnight much occupied in making the
necessary arrangements for fitting it up and furnishing it; but the more
I have been occupied about this, the more I have seen how large a sum
the whole of the fittings and the furniture will require; and this
consideration has led me still more earnestly of late to entreat the
Lord that he would be pleased to give me the means which may yet be
needed for the completion of the whole. Under these circumstances a
brother in the Lord came to me this morning, and after a few minutes'
conversation gave me two thousand pounds, concerning which sum he kindly
gave me permission to use it for the fitting up and furnishing of the
new Orphan House, or for anything else needed in connection with the
orphans. I have placed the whole of this sum, at least for the present,
to the building fund. Now, dear reader, place yourself in my position.
Eleven hundred and ninety-five days it is since I began asking the Lord
for means for the building and fitting up of an Orphan House. Day by
day have I, by his grace, since that time, continued to bring this
matter before him. Without one moment's doubt, or misgiving, or
wavering, have I been enabled to trust in God for the means. From the
beginning, after I had once ascertained the will of God concerning this
work, have I been assured that he would bring it about; yea, as sure
have I been from the beginning that he would do so, as if I had already
had all the means in hand for it, or as if the house had been actually
before me, occupied by the children. But though to faith even three
years ago the whole work was accomplished, to sight there remained many
and great difficulties to be overcome. And even at the commencement of
this day there remained many difficulties in the way of means, as well
as in other respects; and therefore I was on the point of giving myself
again especially to prayer, at the very moment when I was informed that
the donor of the above-mentioned two thousand pounds had called to see
me. Now I have the means, as far as I can see, which will enable me to
meet all the expenses; and in all probability I shall have even several
hundred pounds more than are needed. Thus the Lord shows that he can and
will not only give _as much as is absolutely needed_ for his work, but
also that he can and will give _abundantly_. It is impossible to
describe the real joy I had in God when I received this sum. I was calm,
not in the least excited, able to go on immediately with other work that
came upon me at once after I had received the donation; but
inexpressible was the delight which I had in God, who had thus given me
the full answer to my thousands of prayers, during these eleven hundred
and ninety-five days.

I have thus given a few out of the hundreds of donations, varying from
one farthing to two thousand pounds, as specimens, to show how the Lord
was pleased to furnish me with the means. The total amount which came in
for the building fund was fifteen thousand seven hundred and
eighty-four pounds eighteen shillings tenpence.

After all the expenses had been met for the purchase of the land, the
conveyance of the same, the enrolment of the trust-deeds in chancery,
the building, fitting up, and furnishing of the new Orphan House, there
remained a balance of seven hundred and seventy-six pounds fourteen
shillings threepence three farthings, affording a manifest proof that
the Lord cannot only supply us with all we need in his service, simply
in answer to prayer, but that he can also give us even more than we
need.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the whole of the two years ending May 26, 1850, five day schools,
with 329 children in them, were entirely supported by the funds of this
Institution; and some pecuniary assistance was rendered to four other
day schools. Also a Sunday school, with 168 children, was entirely
supported, and another was occasionally assisted. Lastly, an adult
school, with 106 adult scholars, was supported during this period. There
was expended on these various schools £851, 1s. 5½d., during these
two years. The number of all the children that were taught in the day
schools, through the medium of this Institution, from March 5, 1834, to
May 26, 1850, amounted to 5,114; the number of those in the Sunday
schools amounted to 2,200; and the number of the persons in the adult
school to 1,737. In all, 9,051.

From May 26, 1848, to May 26, 1850, were circulated 719 Bibles, and 239
New Testaments. There was expended on this object, during this period,
of the funds of the Institution, £104, 15s. 11d. There were circulated
altogether from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1850, 6,465 Bibles, and 3,999
New Testaments.

From May 26, 1848, to May 26, 1850, were spent £2,574, 16s. 6d. of the
funds of the Institution for missionary objects, whereby forty
preachers of the gospel in British Guiana, the East Indies, Switzerland,
France, Germany, Canada, Scotland, Ireland, and England, were assisted.

The reader will notice how greatly this object of the Institution was
increased during the last four years previous to May 26, 1850. This
arose from the fact that, in the early part of 1846, the need of certain
brethren who labored in the word and doctrine came before me, and God
laid them on my heart to labor for them in prayer, in order that I might
obtain means from him for such brethren to a greater extent than I had
done before. Ever since then the Lord has been pleased increasingly to
use me in this way. For from May 26, 1846, to May 26, 1848, there was
spent for that object nearly three times as much as during any former
period of the same length; and during the period from May 26, 1848, to
May 26, 1850, I was not only allowed to do as much as before, but to
expend even £1,016, 5s. more than during the former period,
notwithstanding all the many heavy additional expenses for the various
other objects of the Institution.

It is my sweet privilege to state that the labors of many of these forty
servants of the Lord, whom I assisted, were especially owned of God
during these two years. There took place very many conversions through
their instrumentality.

From May 26, 1848, to May 26, 1850, the sum of £184, 9s. 4½d. was
expended on the circulation of tracts. There were circulated during this
period 130,464 tracts. The total number which was circulated from Nov.
19, 1840, up to May 26, 1850, amounted to 294,128.

From July 24, 1849, up to May 26, 1850, altogether 170 orphans were
received, from ten months old and upwards. On May 26, 1850, there were,
therefore, 275 orphans in the new Orphan House; and with the teachers,
overseers, nurses, and in-door and out-door servants, etc., the whole
number of persons connected with the establishment was 308. The total
number of orphans who were under our care from April, 1836, up to May
26, 1850, was 443.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £33,868, 11s. 1¼d. was given to me for the orphans, _as
the result of prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to
May 26, 1850. It may be also interesting to the reader to know that the
total amount which was given as free contributions, for the other
objects, from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1850, amounted
to £10,531, 3s. 3¾d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles
and tracts, and by the payments of the children in the schools, up to
May 26, 1850, amounted to £2,707, 9s. 3½d.

The total of the current expenses for the orphans from May 26, 1848, to
May 26, 1849, was £1,559, 6s. 9d., and the total of the current expenses
for them from May 26, 1849, to May 26, 1850, was only £2,665, 13s.
2¾d., _i. e._ only about £1,100 more than the previous year.

As to matters connected with my own personal affairs, from May 26, 1848,
to May 26, 1850:--

Dec. 31, 1848. During this year the Lord was pleased to give me £474,
17s. 7d. To this is again to be added, for this year also, as before
stated, the free education of my daughter at a boarding-school, worth at
least £50.

Dec. 31, 1849. The Lord sent me, during the past year, £413, 2s. 4d.




CHAPTER XX.

A NEW VICTORY OF FAITH.

1850-1851.

    PAST MERCIES AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO NEW UNDERTAKINGS--A HOUSE FOR
    SEVEN HUNDRED ORPHANS PROPOSED--WALKING BY FAITH--COUNSEL SOUGHT
    FROM GOD--THE PURPOSE FORMED--DELIGHT IN THE MAGNITUDE AND
    DIFFICULTY OF THE DESIGN.


December 5, 1850. It is now sixteen years and nine months this evening
since I began the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad.
This Institution was in its beginning exceedingly small. Now it is so
large that I have not only disbursed, since its commencement, about
fifty thousand pounds sterling, but that also the current expenses,
after the rate of the last months, amount to above six thousand pounds a
year. I did "open my mouth wide," this very evening fifteen years ago,
and the Lord has filled it. The new Orphan House is now inhabited by
three hundred orphans; and there are altogether three hundred and
thirty-five persons connected with it. My labor is abundant. The
separation from my dear wife and child is great, on account of my being
the greater part of the day at the new Orphan House; sometimes also by
night. But notwithstanding all this, I have again and again thought
about laboring more than ever in serving poor orphans. Within the last
ten days this matter has much occupied my mind, and for the last five
days I have had much prayer about it. It has passed through my mind to
build another Orphan House, large enough for seven hundred orphans, so
that I might be able to care for one thousand altogether. The points
which have led me to this thought are: 1. The many distressing cases of
children, bereaved of _both_ parents, who have no helper. I have
received two hundred and seven orphans within the last sixteen months,
and have now seventy-eight waiting for admission, without having
vacancies for any. I had about sixty children waiting for admission
about sixteen months since, so about two hundred and thirty children
have been applied for within these sixteen months. But, humanly
speaking, for the next sixteen months the number of applications will be
far greater, as the work is now so much more widely known; except it be
that persons may hear that the new Orphan House is quite full, and on
that account may consider it useless to apply. 2. The constitution of
most other charitable institutions for orphans makes the admission of a
really destitute orphan, _i. e._ a child bereaved of _both_ parents, and
_without an influential friend_, very difficult, if not hopeless; for
the admission by means of the votes of the donors precludes _really
poor_ persons from having, in most instances, the benefit of these
institutions, as they cannot give the time nor expend the money
necessary for obtaining such votes. I have myself seen that certain
candidates had several thousand votes. The necessity of this arrangement
being continued may be much regretted by many who are connected with
such institutions, but they have no power to alter it. In our case,
nothing is needed but application to me; and the _very poorest person,
without influence, without friends, without any expense_, no matter
where he lives, or of whatever religious denomination, who applies for
children born in lawful wedlock, bereaved of _both_ parents, and in
destitute circumstances, may procure their admission. Now, as the new
poor-law is against giving relief to relatives for orphan children out
of the poor-houses; and as there is such a difficulty for really poor
people to get their orphan relatives admitted into ordinary orphan
establishments; I feel myself particularly called upon to be the friend
of the orphan, by making an easy way for admission, _provided it is
really a destitute case_. 3. The confidence which God has caused
thousands of his children to repose in me calls upon me to make use of
it to the utmost of my power, and to seek yet more largely to be their
almoner. 4. The experience which I have had in this service now for
fifteen years, during which time I have gone from the smallest
commencement of the work to the having at present three hundred orphans
under my care, calls upon me to make use of this my experience to the
utmost of my power. No member of a committee, no president of a society,
could possibly have the same experience, except he himself had
practically been engaged in such a work for a number of years, as I have
been. 5. This very experience makes things light to me, under God's
help, which were difficult to me formerly, and which would be very
difficult now to many: might I not therefore proceed still further? 6.
If seven hundred more young souls could be brought under regular godly
training (and their number would be renewed from time to time), what
blessed service for the kingdom of Christ, and what profitable
expenditure of labor, too, with the blessing of God, even for this
realm, in a civil and moral point of view! 7. But that which outweighs
every one of these six reasons is, lastly, this: I began this orphan
work fifteen years ago for the very purpose of illustrating to the world
and to the church that there is verily a God in heaven who hears prayer;
that God is the living God. Now, this last object is more and more
fully accomplished the larger the work is, provided I am helped in
obtaining the means simply through prayer and faith.

But whilst such like thoughts have passed through my mind, there are
others of another character. For instance: 1. I have already an
abundance of work. 2. My dear wife has already an abundance of work. Her
whole time, with little intermission (except for prayer and reading of
the Word of God), is occupied, directly or indirectly, about the
orphans. 3. Am I not undertaking too much for my bodily strength and my
mental powers, by thinking about another Orphan House? 4. Am I not going
beyond the measure of my faith in thinking about enlarging the work so
as to double or treble it? 5. Is not this a delusion of Satan, an
attempt to cast me down altogether from my sphere of usefulness, by
making me to go beyond my measure? 6. Is it not also, perhaps, a snare
to puff me up, in attempting to build a very large Orphan House?

Under these circumstances I can only pray that the Lord in his tender
mercy would not allow Satan to gain an advantage over me. By the grace
of God my heart says,--Lord, if I could be sure that it is thy will that
I should go forward in this matter, I would do so cheerfully; and, on
the other hand, if I could be sure that these are vain, foolish, proud
thoughts, that they are not from thee, I would, by thy grace, hate them,
and entirely put them aside.

My hope is in God; he will help me and teach me. Judging, however, from
his former dealings with me, it would not be a strange thing to me, nor
surprising, if he called me to labor yet still more largely in this way.

The thoughts about enlarging the orphan work have not arisen on account
of an abundance of money having lately come in; for I have had of late
to wait for about seven weeks upon God, whilst little, very little
comparatively, came in, _i. e._ about four times as much was going out
as came in; and, had not the Lord previously sent me large sums, we
should have been distressed indeed.

Lord, how can thy servant know thy will in this matter? Wilt thou be
pleased to teach him?

Dec. 11. During the last six days, since writing the above, I have been,
day after day, waiting upon God concerning this matter. It has generally
been more or less all the day on my heart. When I have been awaking at
night, it has not been far from my thoughts. Yet all this without the
least excitement. I am perfectly calm and quiet respecting it. My soul
would be rejoiced to go forward in this service, could I be sure that
the Lord would have me to do so; for then, notwithstanding the
numberless difficulties, all would be well, and his name would be
magnified.

On the other hand, were I assured that the Lord would have me to be
satisfied with my present sphere of service, and that I should not pray
about enlarging the work, by his grace I could, _without an effort_,
cheerfully yield to it; for he has brought me into such a state of heart
that I only desire to please him in this matter. Moreover, hitherto I
have not spoken about this thing even to my beloved wife, the sharer of
my joys and sorrows and labors for more than twenty years; nor is it
likely that I shall do so for some time to come; for I prefer quietly
waiting on the Lord, without conversing on this subject, in order that
thus I may be kept the more easily, by his blessing, from being
influenced by things from without. The burden of my prayer concerning
this matter is, that the Lord would not allow me to make a mistake, and
that he would teach me his will. As to outward things, I have had
nothing to encourage me during these six days, but the very reverse; for
the income for the various objects of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution for Home and Abroad has been unusually small, only six
pounds fourteen shillings altogether, while the outgoings have been one
hundred and thirty-three pounds eleven shillings sevenpence. But all
this would not weigh the least with me, could I be quite sure that the
Lord would have me to go forward.

The especial burden of my prayer, therefore, is, that God would be
pleased to teach me his will. My mind has also been especially pondering
how I could know his will satisfactorily concerning this particular.
Sure I am that I shall be taught. I therefore desire to patiently wait
for the Lord's time, when he shall be pleased to shine on my path
concerning this point.

Dec. 26. Fifteen days have elapsed since I wrote the preceding
paragraph. Every day since then I have continued to pray about this
matter, and that with a goodly measure of earnestness, by the help of
God. There has passed away scarcely an hour during these days in which,
whilst awake, this matter has not been more or less before me; but all
without even a shadow of excitement. I converse with no one about it.
Hitherto have I not even done so with my dear wife. From this I refrain
still, and deal with God alone about the matter, in order that no
outward influence and no outward excitement may keep me from attaining
unto a clear discovery of his will. I have the fullest and most peaceful
assurance that he will clearly show me his will. This evening I have had
again an especial solemn season for prayer, to seek to know the will of
God. But whilst I continue to entreat and beseech the Lord that he would
not allow me to be deluded in this business, I may say that I have
scarcely any doubt remaining on my mind as to what will be the issue,
even that I should go forward in this matter. As this, however, is one
of the most momentous steps that I have ever taken, I judge that I
cannot go about this matter with too much caution, prayerfulness, and
deliberation. I am in no hurry about it. I could wait for years, by
God's grace, were this his will, before even taking one single step
towards this thing, or even speaking to any one about it; and, on the
other hand, I would set to work to-morrow, were the Lord to bid me do
so. This calmness of mind, this having no will of my own in the matter,
this only wishing to please my heavenly Father in it, this only seeking
his and not my honor in it; this state of heart, I say, is the fullest
assurance to me that my heart is not under a fleshly excitement, and
that if I am helped thus to go on I shall know the will of God to the
full. But, while I write thus, I cannot but add, at the same time, that
I do crave the honor and the glorious privilege to be more and more used
by the Lord. I have served Satan much in my younger years, and I desire
now with all my might to serve God during the remaining days of my
earthly pilgrimage. I am forty-five years and three months old. Every
day decreases the number of days that I have to stay on earth. I
therefore desire with all my might to work. There are vast multitudes of
orphans to be provided for. About five years ago a brother in the Lord
told me that he had seen, in an official report, that there were at that
time six thousand young orphans in the prisons of England. My heart
longs to be instrumental in preventing such young orphans from having to
go to prison. I desire to be used by the Lord as an instrument in
providing all the necessary temporal supplies, not only for the three
hundred now under my care, but for seven hundred more. I desire to
alleviate yet further the sufferings of poor dying widows, when looking
on their helpless orphans about to be left behind. I desire yet further
to assist poor persons to whom destitute orphans are left, and who are
unable to provide for them. I desire to be allowed to provide scriptural
instruction for a thousand orphans, instead of doing so for three
hundred. I desire to expound the Holy Scriptures regularly to a
thousand orphans, instead of doing so to three hundred. I desire that
thus it may be yet more abundantly manifest that God is still the hearer
and answerer of prayer, and that he is the living God now, as he ever
was and ever will be, when he shall, simply in answer to prayer, have
condescended to provide me with a house for seven hundred orphans, and
with means to support them. This last consideration is the most
important point in my mind. The Lord's honor is the principal point with
me in this whole matter; and just because that is the case, if he would
be more glorified by my not going forward in this business, I should, by
his grace, be perfectly content to give up all thoughts about another
Orphan House. Surely, in such a state of mind, obtained by thy Holy
Spirit, thou, O my heavenly Father, wilt not suffer thy child to be
mistaken, much less to be deluded! By the help of God I shall continue
further, day by day, to wait upon him in prayer concerning this thing
till he shall bid me act.

January 2, 1851. A week ago I wrote the preceding paragraph. During this
week I have still been helped, day by day, and more than once every day,
to seek the guidance of the Lord about another Orphan House. The burden
of my prayer has still been, that he in his great mercy would keep me
from making a mistake. During the last week the Book of Proverbs has
come in the course of my Scripture reading, and my heart has been
refreshed, in reference to this subject, by the following passages:
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own
understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths." Prov. iii. 5, 6. By the grace of God I do acknowledge the Lord
in my ways, and in this thing in particular; I have therefore the
comfortable assurance that he will direct my paths concerning this part
of my service, as to whether I shall be occupied in it or not. Further:
"The integrity of the upright shall preserve them; but the perverseness
of fools shall destroy them." Prov. xi. 3. By the grace of God I am
upright in this business. My honest purpose is to get glory to God.
Therefore I expect to be guided aright. Further: "Commit thy works unto
the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established." Prov. xvi. 3. I do
commit my works unto the Lord; I therefore expect that my thoughts will
be established. My heart is more and more coming to a calm, quiet, and
settled assurance that the end will be that the Lord will condescend to
use me yet further in the orphan work. Here, Lord, is thy servant!

Jan. 14. Twelve days have passed away since I wrote the last paragraph.
I have still day by day been enabled to wait upon the Lord with
reference to my enlarging the orphan work. I have been during the whole
of this period also in perfect peace, which is the result of seeking in
this thing only the Lord's honor and the temporal and spiritual benefit
of my fellow-men. Without an effort could I, by his grace, put aside all
thoughts about this whole affair, could I be only assured that it is the
will of God that I should do so; and, on the other hand, at once would I
go forward, if he would have it to be so. I have still kept this matter
entirely to myself. Though it is now about seven weeks since day by day,
more or less, my mind has been exercised about it, and since I have
daily prayed concerning it, yet not one human being knows of it. As yet
I have not mentioned it even to my dear wife, in order that thus, by
quietly waiting upon the Lord, I might not be influenced by what might
be said to me on the subject. This evening I have particularly set apart
for prayer, beseeching the Lord once more not to allow me to be mistaken
in this thing, and much less to be deluded by the devil. I have also
sought to let all the reasons _against_ building another Orphan House,
and all the reasons _for_ doing so, pass before my mind; and I now, for
the sake of clearness and definiteness, write them down.

_Reasons_ AGAINST _establishing another Orphan House for Seven Hundred
Orphans._--1. Would not this be going beyond my measure _spiritually_?
according to that word: "For I say, through the grace given unto me, to
every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he
ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith." Rom. xii. 3. Answer: If the Lord were
to leave me to myself, the tenth part of the difficulties and trials
which befall me now in connection with the various objects of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad would be enough to
overwhelm me; but, whilst he is pleased to sustain me, I am able day by
day to pass on peacefully, and am carried through one difficulty after
the other: and thus, by God's help, even with my present measure of
faith, if continued to me, I should be enabled to bear up under other
difficulties and trials; but I look for an increase of faith with every
fresh difficulty through which the Lord is pleased to help me.

2. Would it not be going beyond my measure _naturally_, with reference
to mental and bodily strength? Answer: Of all the objections against
establishing another Orphan House, there is none that weighs more with
me than this one; I might say, it is the only real difficulty. This,
however, too, I am enabled to put aside and to overcome thus: By
husbanding my strength, by great order, by regular habits, by lightening
the work as much as possible, by using every help that I can, I have
been enabled to get through a vast quantity of work. My immense
correspondence of about three thousand letters a year I have been
enabled to accomplish without a secretary. The whole management and
direction and the whole vast correspondence of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution has devolved upon myself alone these sixteen years and ten
months, and I have been thinking that, by seeking for an efficient
secretary, and an efficient clerk, and an inspector of the schools, I
might, with God's help, accomplish yet more, though much of what I have
been doing hitherto would need to be done by others. There have been
several other arrangements brought before my mind, since I have been
exercised about this matter, whereby, with the blessing of God, the work
might be lightened. I should certainly need efficient helpers to carry
out the plans before me; but with such, I, as director, might be
enabled, by God's help, to accomplish yet more.

3. There must be a limit to my work and service. Answer: That is true,
and if I were quite sure that the present state of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution were to be the limit, I would at once lay aside
this thing; but I am not sure that I am come as yet to God's limit. All
these sixteen years and ten months the work has been constantly
progressing, and the Lord has helped me continually; and now my mind is
just in the same way exercised as when, fifteen years ago, I began the
orphan work, and as when, thirteen years ago, I enlarged the orphan
work, and as when, seven years and nine months since, I still further
enlarged the orphan work, and as when, five years and two months since,
I was led to decide on building the new Orphan House. Under these
circumstances, having been helped through all these difficulties, and
seeing such a vast field of usefulness before me, and as I have so many
applications for the admission of very destitute orphans, I long to be
used still further, and cannot say that as yet the Lord has brought me
to his limit.

4. Is it not like "tempting God," to think of building another Orphan
House for seven hundred more orphans? Answer: "Tempting God" means,
according to the Holy Scriptures, to limit him in any of his
attributes; I, by his grace, do not wish to limit his power or his
willingness to give to me, his poor servant, simply in answer to prayer,
all the means and every other help and blessing which I shall need to
build another large Orphan House.

5. You will not get the means for building and fitting up so large an
Orphan House; and, even if you did, how will you, _at the same time_,
get the means for carrying on the work which already exists? Answer:
Looking at the matter _naturally_, this is indeed a weighty objection.

The new Orphan House, with its three hundred orphans only, cost about
fifteen thousand pounds to build and to fit up and furnish, and still
the expenses are not all met even now. It will, in all probability, cost
several hundred pounds yet. And this large sum was needed, though the
style of the building is most simple, and though the field in which it
was built was comparatively cheap. After this rate, a building to
accommodate seven hundred orphans, with the necessary ground attached to
it for the cultivation of the vegetables used in the Institution, could
not be less than thirty-five thousand pounds. Now, looking at it
naturally, where is this great sum to come from? Though I looked at all
my friends who have given hitherto, and several have done so very
liberally, yet I should have no natural prospect whatever that I should
receive this amount; especially if it be kept in mind that I should need
six or seven thousand pounds besides, every year, for carrying on _that
which is already in existence_. I might, therefore, well tremble,
looking at the matter naturally, and say, I shall never have the money
for this intended Orphan House for seven hundred children; for where is
this large sum of thirty-five thousand pounds to come from? And even if
I were to get the money, will not persons, in giving means for such a
building fund, take it away from what they might have given me for
carrying on the work which exists already? But whilst thus,
_naturally_, I have no hope of succeeding, I am not in the least
discouraged _spiritually_; for by faith in the living God I say this: He
has the power to give me this thirty-five thousand pounds, and much more
were it needed; and he has the power, in the mean time, to give me also
all the large sums required, week after week, for meeting the current
expenses for the present state of the work. Moreover, I delight in the
greatness of the difficulty as it respects the large sum needed for
building and fitting up such an establishment; for I desire to be most
fully assured, from the very outset, that I go forward in this matter
according to the Lord's bidding. If so, he will give me the means; if
not, I shall not have them. Nor do I mean to apply to any one personally
for pecuniary help, but purpose to give myself to prayer for means, as
heretofore.

6. Suppose, now, you were even to succeed in getting this large Orphan
House built, how will you be able to provide for seven hundred other
orphans? Answer: There is much weight in this objection, looking at it
_naturally_. I am too much a man of business, and too much a person of
calm, quiet, cool calculation, not to feel its force. And indeed, were I
only to look at the thing _naturally_, I should at once be ready to own
that I am going too far; for the increase of expenditure for the support
of these seven hundred other orphans could not be less than eight
thousand pounds a year more, so that the current expenses of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution, reckoning its present state, and
including those eight thousand pounds, would be about fifteen thousand
pounds a year. Now I am free to own that I have no human prospect of
obtaining such a sum year by year. But while matters stand thus, looking
at them _naturally_, I see no difficulty at all in them _spiritually_.
If according to the will of God I am enabled to go about this intended
second Orphan House; and if, under his help, I shall be enabled to
finish it; he will surely provide for those who are gathered together in
it as long as he shall be pleased to enable me to trust in him for
supplies. And here I look back upon the way in which the Lord has led me
and dealt with me. When, about seventeen years ago, I took up, in
dependence upon the living God for means, two charity schools, with
which the Scriptural Knowledge Institution commenced (and this involved
an expense of less than one hundred pounds a year), I had no certain
prospect of being able to meet even that small sum; but God so helped me
that I had shortly _six_ charity schools. He helped me then, also, and
enabled me to meet all their expenses. When, fifteen years ago, I began
the orphan work, which was connected with far heavier expenses, I had
still less prospect, according to natural reason, of being able to meet
_them_; but I trusted in God, and he helped me, and he not only enabled
me to meet the current expenses of thirty orphans in the first house
rented for them, but enabled me also soon to open another for thirty-six
more, and I was also enabled to meet all those expenses; for as I had
begun in faith in the living God, and not in putting my trust in my
brethren in Christ, so I was not confounded. After I had gone on some
time with these orphans in the two rented houses, about thirteen years
ago the Lord was pleased greatly to encourage me and to increase my
faith by a donation of five hundred pounds for the orphans; for up to
that period I had never received more than one hundred pounds at once.
But this kind donor, a stranger to me up to that time, suggested to me
the propriety of investing this sum and using only the interest of it,
as I could not expect to have the orphans supported for a continuance in
the way they had been till then; for that such institutions must depend
upon regular subscriptions or funded property, otherwise they could not
go on. As, however, this was only a friendly hint, and no condition
under which the money was given, I took this five hundred pounds towards
fitting up a third house, for the reception of thirty more orphans. From
that time the work has been increasing more and more, till it has come
to what it is at present. Now, suppose I had said, seventeen years ago,
looking at matters according to natural reason, "The two charity schools
are enough, I must not go any further;" then the work would have stopped
there. Or, if I had had a little more trust in my exertions or my
friends, I might have taken at the utmost one or two steps further.
Instead of this, however, I looked in no degree whatever at things
according to my natural fallen reason, and I trusted not in the circle
of my Christian friends, but in the living God; and the result has been
that there have been since 1834 ten thousand souls under our instruction
in the various day schools, Sunday schools, and adult schools; several
hundred orphans have been brought up, and many of them from their very
tenderest infancy; several hundred thousand tracts and many thousand
copies of the Word of God have been circulated; about forty preachers of
the gospel at home and abroad have been, for several years, assisted in
connection with the Scriptural Knowledge Institution; and a house has
been built and fitted up for the accommodation of three hundred
destitute orphans, each of whom has neither father nor mother. How
blessed therefore is it to trust in God, and in him alone, and not in
circumstances nor friends! There is, however, one thing which I must
record here, because it has taken place since I last wrote in my journal
on this subject, on January 2. It is this. During these twelve days I
have received for the various objects of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution, in smaller donations, sixty-four pounds fifteen shillings
sixpence two farthings, also a donation of one hundred and fifty pounds,
and one of three thousand pounds. Is not this a plain proof that God is
both able and willing to help simply in answer to prayer? Is not human
reason confounded by such instances? When I first began to write these
exercises of my mind about another Orphan House, I knew not that on
January 4, I should receive a donation of three thousand pounds; yet I
was fully assured that God was able to support one thousand orphans as
easily as he did the thirty whom I first received in a rented house.
Does he not, however, tell me by all this, Go forward, my servant, and I
will help thee?

7. But, it might be said, suppose you were able by prayer to obtain this
large sum for building a house for seven hundred other orphans; and
suppose you were able to provide for them during your lifetime,--what
would become of this Institution after your death? Answer: I am quite
familiar with this objection. I have heard it many times as a reason
against the way of obtaining the means for the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution, simply by trusting in God, without any funded property, and
without looking to regular subscribers; but my reply is this. My
business is, with all my might to serve my own generation; in doing so I
shall best serve the next generation, should the Lord Jesus tarry. Soon
he may come again; but, if he tarry, and I have to fall asleep before
his return, I shall not have been altogether without profit to the
generation to come, were the Lord only to enable me to serve my own
generation. Suppose this objection were a sound one, I ought never to
have commenced the orphan work at all, for fear of what might become of
it after my death, and thus all the hundreds of destitute children
without father and mother, whom the Lord has allowed me to care for
during the last fifteen years, would not have been taken up by me. The
same argument was again and again used to Franké, my esteemed
countryman, who at Hallé, in Prussia, commenced, about A. D. 1696, the
largest charitable establishment for poor children that, as far as I
know, exists in the world. He trusted in God alone. He went on trusting
in God alone. And God helped him throughout abundantly. Simply by trust
in the living God, the Institutions, resembling a large street rather
than a house, were erected, and about two thousand children instructed
in them. For about thirty years all was going on under his own eye,
until 1727, when it pleased God to take his servant to himself. At his
death these Institutions were directed by his truly pious son-in-law. It
is true that, at the latter part of the last century, and during the
first part of the present, there was little real vital godliness in
these Institutions; still, they were a temporal blessing to many tens of
thousands of young persons even then. So then for several tens of years
they were carried on in a truly godly way, after Franké's death, and
when afterwards there was but little real, vital godliness found in
these schools, yet tens of thousands of children were benefited at least
for this life. Now these Institutions have existed already one hundred
and fifty years, and are in existence still; and, if the Lord Jesus
tarry, are likely, humanly speaking, to exist hereafter, as they have
existed hitherto. Suppose, then, that dear man of God, A. H. Franké, had
listened to the suggestions of unbelief, and said, I must not undertake
this work, for what will become of it after my death?--then all the
blessing which spiritually resulted from it to thousands, and all the
temporal benefits which have resulted from it to hundreds of thousands,
would have been lost. I add, however, this. The new Orphan House has
been placed in the hands of eleven trustees, and has been properly
enrolled in chancery, and so also, should God condescend to honor me
further in building for him this intended house for seven hundred
orphans, it would likewise be placed in the hands of trustees and
enrolled in chancery. I say one word in conclusion on this subject: let
every one take heed lest, in caring about what will become of the next
generation, he forget to serve his own generation. The latter, each one
should seek to do with his might, and thus it should be with each
succeeding generation; then, though we be dead, yet should we be
speaking. A. H. Franké is long since gone to his rest, but he spoke to
my soul in 1826, and he is speaking to my soul now; and to his example I
am greatly indebted in having been stirred up to care about poor
children in general, and about poor orphans in particular.

8. The last objection which has occurred to my own mind is, that, by
building another Orphan House, I should be in danger of being lifted up.
Answer: I should be in danger of it indeed; and so I am in great danger,
even were I not in the least degree to go forward. Yea, the tenth part
of the honor which the Lord has condescended to bestow upon me, and the
tenth part of service with which he has been pleased to intrust me,
would be enough, if I were left to myself, exceedingly to puff me up. I
cannot say that hitherto the Lord has kept me humble; but I can say that
hitherto he has given me a hearty desire to give to him all the glory,
and to consider it a great condescension on his part that he has been
pleased to use me as an instrument in his service. I do not see,
therefore, that fear of being lifted up ought to keep me from going
forward in this work; but that I have rather to beseech the Lord that he
would be pleased to give me a lowly mind, and never suffer me to rob him
of the glory which is due to him alone.

_Reasons_ FOR _establishing another Orphan House for Seven Hundred
Orphans._--1. The many applications for the admission of destitute
orphans which continue to be made, I consider as a call from God upon me
to do all that is in my power to provide a home and scriptural
education for a still greater number of orphans. Nothing but positive
inability to go forward ought to keep me standing still, whilst I have
almost daily fresh entreaties to receive orphans. Since I began writing
on this subject in my journal, thirty more orphans have been applied
for, from two years old and upward. I cannot refuse to help, as long as
I see a door open, and opened by God, as I consider, to help them.

2. The moral state of the poor-houses greatly influences me to go
forward. I have heard it again and again, from good authority, that
children, placed at the Unions, are corrupted, on account of the
children of vagrants, and other very bad young people, who are in such
places; so that many poor relatives of orphans, though unable to provide
for them, cannot bear the idea of their going there, lest they should be
corrupted. I therefore judge that, even for the sake of keeping orphans
of poor yet respectable people from being obliged to mix with the
children of vagabonds, I ought to do, to my utmost power, all I can to
help them. For this reason, then, I purpose, in dependence upon the
living God, to go forward and to establish another Orphan House for
seven hundred destitute children, who are bereaved of both parents. When
I write thus about the poor-houses, I do not wish to be understood in
the way of reproof: for I know not how these matters could be altered;
but I simply state the fact that thus it is.

3. In this my purpose I am the more confirmed, since I know it to be a
fact that the Orphan Houses already in existence in the kingdom are by
no means sufficient to admit _even the most deserving and distressing
cases_, and far less all that it would be well to provide for. Moreover,
there is great difficulty connected with the admission of an orphan into
most of the ordinary orphan establishments, on account of the votes
which must be obtained, so that _really_ needy persons have neither
time nor money to obtain them. Does not the fact that there were six
thousand young orphans in the prisons of England about five years ago
call aloud for an extension of orphan institutions? By God's help I will
try to do what I can to keep poor orphans from prison.

4. In this purpose I am still further encouraged by the great help which
the Lord has hitherto given me in this blessed service. When I look at
the small beginning, and consider how the Lord has helped me now for
more than fifteen years in the orphan work; and when I consider how he
has been pleased to help me through one great difficulty after another;
and when I consider, especially, how, as with an unseen hand, I might
say almost against my will and former desires and thoughts, he has led
me on from one step to another, and has enlarged the work more and
more,--I say, when I review all this, and compare with it my present
exercise of mind, I find the great help, the uninterrupted help which
the Lord has given me for more than fifteen years, a great reason for
going forward in this work. And this, trusting in him, I am resolved to
do.

5. A further reason for going forward in this service I see in the
experience which I have had in it. From the smallest commencement up to
the present state of the establishment, with its three hundred orphans,
all has gone through my own hands. In the work itself I obtained the
experience. _It_ has grown _with the work_. I have been the sole
director of the work, under God, from its smallest commencement. Now
this is not an every-day case. No committee member of a society, no
president or vice-president of an institution, except they had been
situated as myself, could have this experience. Coupled with this is the
measure of gift which the Lord has been pleased to give me for such
work, and for the exercise of which I am responsible to him. These
things, in connection with the former reasons, it appears to me, are a
call from God to go forward in a greater degree than ever in this work.

6. The spiritual benefit of still more orphans is another especial
reason with me why I feel called to go forward. The orphans who have
been under my care hitherto were almost all the children of parents who
were naturally weak in body, if not consumptive. The very fact of a
child being deprived of _both_ parents when four, five, six, or seven
years old, shows that, except the parents lost their lives by casualty,
they were constitutionally weak. On this account young orphans,
generally speaking, require particular care as to their health. In this
respect I desire to care for them; but there is more than that to be
attended to. I further heartily desire to keep them from the corrupting
and demoralizing effect of the lowest sort of children in the streets
and courts and Unions. But I desire more for them than mere decency and
morality; I desire that they should be useful members of society, and
that the prisons of the United Kingdom should not be filled with poor,
destitute, and homeless orphans; and we bring them up therefore in
habits of industry, and seek to instruct them in those things which are
useful for the life that now is. But I desire more than this for the
orphans. I cannot be satisfied with anything concerning them short of
this, that their souls be won for the Lord. For this reason I long to
have them from their early days, yea, the younger the better, under my
care, that thus, under the care of godly nurses and teachers, they may
be brought up from their earliest days in the fear of the Lord. Now, as
this is the chief and primary aim concerning the dear orphans, even the
salvation of their souls through faith in the Lord Jesus, I long to be
more extensively used than hitherto, even that I may have a thousand of
them instead of three hundred under my care.

7. But there is one point which weighs more strongly with me than even
the last mentioned one. It is this: When I began the orphan work more
than fifteen years ago, it was for the definite and especial purpose
that, by means of it, the unconverted might see, through the answers of
prayer that I received in connection with it, that there is verily
reality in the things of God; and that the children of God might have
their faith strengthened by means of it, and might be encouraged, in all
simplicity, to deal with God under every circumstance, and trust in him
at all times. But if this would be answered in a measure by the state in
which the orphan work has been in former times, and more so by what it
has been since the erection of the new Orphan House, it would be still
more so, by the blessing of God, by my going forward in it to a far
greater degree than before. This point, even the glory of God in the
manifestation of his readiness to hear prayer, has weighed especially
and supremely with me in purposing to enlarge the orphan work.

8. Lastly, I am peaceful and happy, spiritually, in the prospect of
enlarging the work, as on former occasions when I had to do so. This
weighs particularly with me as a reason for going forward. After all the
calm, quiet, prayerful consideration of the subject for about eight
weeks, I am peaceful and happy, spiritually, in the purpose of enlarging
the field. This, after all the heart-searching which I have had, and the
daily prayer to be kept from delusion and mistake in this thing, and the
betaking myself to the word of God, would not be the case, I judge, had
not the Lord purposed to condescend to use me more than ever in this
service.

I therefore, on the ground of the objections answered, and these eight
reasons FOR enlarging the work, come to the conclusion that it is the
will of the blessed God that his poor and most unworthy servant should
yet more extensively serve him in this work, which he is quite willing
to do.

Up to this day, Jan. 25, 1851, I have not spoken to one human being
about it. As yet even my dear wife knows not about it. I purpose to keep
the matter still for some time entirely to myself, dealing with God
alone about it, in order that no outward excitement may be in the least
degree a stimulus to me. I still pray to be kept from mistake and
delusion in this thing; not that I think I am mistaken or deluded, quite
the reverse, but yet I would distrust myself and cling to God, to be
kept from mistakes and delusions.

Jan. 31. For several weeks past I have now had no doubt that the Lord
would have me to serve him in the erection and fitting up of another
Orphan House for seven hundred orphans, and I am quite decided on doing
so, under his help; and I am now quiet about it, not because I have the
least misgiving in my own mind, but because I know that it is most
suitable that I should still for some time continue to deal quietly with
God alone about it.

March 5. Nearly five weeks have passed away since I wrote the last
paragraph, and my mind has not been once during this time, even for a
moment, in uncertainty as to what I ought to do. It is now about fifteen
weeks since I have been especially praying about this subject, and three
months since I began first to write on the subject in my journal, and
about ten weeks since I have had any doubt as to what is the will of the
Lord concerning this service. I believe that, altogether unworthy though
I am of this great honor, he will condescend to use me further and more
extensively than before in caring for destitute children who are
bereaved of both parents. And this I purpose to do.

May 24. From the time that I began to write down the exercises of my
mind on Dec. 5, 1850, till this day, ninety-two more orphans have been
applied for, and seventy-eight were already waiting for admission
before. But this number increases rapidly as the work becomes more and
more known.

On the ground of what has been recorded above, I purpose to go forward
in this service, and to seek to build, to the praise and honor of the
living God, another Orphan House, large enough to accommodate seven
hundred orphans.

When I published these exercises of my mind, and made known my purpose
respecting the intended Orphan House for seven hundred orphans, in the
Twelfth Report of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, the following
particulars were added to what has been stated:--

1. All this time, though now six months have elapsed since I first began
to be exercised about this matter, I have never once been led to ask the
Lord for means for this work, but have only continued day by day to seek
guidance from him as to whether I should undertake it or not.

2. The means requisite to accomplish the building and fitting up of a
house which shall be really suitable for my intended purposes, though
the building be quite simple, cannot be less than thirty-five thousand
pounds, including fifteen or twenty acres of land round the building for
cultivation by the spade, in order to obtain out of our own grounds all
the vegetables which are so important to the health of the children.

3. I do not mean to begin the building until I have the means requisite
in hand, just as was the case with regard to the new Orphan House. If
God will condescend to use me in building for him another Orphan House
(as I judge he will), he will give me the means for it. Now, though I
have not on my own mind any doubt left that it is his will that I should
do so, which has been stated again and again in the preceding pages;
yet there is one point still wanting for confirmation, and that is, that
he will also furnish me, without personal application to any one, with
all the means requisite for this new part of my service. I am the more
needing also to my own soul this last of all the proofs that I have not
been mistaken (as I firmly believe I have not been), in order to have
unquestionable assurance that, whatever trials hereafter might be
allowed to befall me in connection with this work, I did not at my own
bidding and according to my own natural desire undertake it, but that it
was under the guidance of God. The greatness of the sum required affords
me a kind of secret joy; for the greater the difficulty to be overcome,
the more will it be seen, to the glory of God, how much can be done by
prayer and faith; and also because, when God himself overcomes our
difficulties for us, we have, in this very fact, the assurance that we
are engaged in his work, and not in our own.




CHAPTER XXI.

UNVARYING PROSPERITY.

1850-1852.

    DESIRES FOR MORE ENLARGED USEFULNESS GRATIFIED--A LARGE DONATION
    ANTICIPATED AND RECEIVED--REVIEW OF 1851--PERSONAL
    EXPERIENCE--BUILDING FUND FOR THE SECOND NEW ORPHAN HOUSE--DOUBT
    RESISTED--WAITING ON GOD NOT IN VAIN--REVIEW OF 1852.


At the commencement of the year beginning with May, 1850, it was my
purpose to seek help from the Lord that I might be able, in a still
greater degree than before, to assist brethren who labor in the gospel
at home and abroad, in dependence upon God for their temporal supplies,
and to labor more than ever in the circulation of the Holy Scriptures,
and of simple gospel tracts.

June 11. By the sums which came in within the first fifteen days of this
period I was able to begin to carry out the purpose I had formed; and as
the Lord enabled me, without anxious reckoning, to go on giving out as
he was pleased to intrust me with means, so again he sent further
supplies before all was gone. It is a point of great importance in the
divine life not to be anxiously reckoning about the morrow, nor dealing
out sparingly on account of possible future wants which never may come;
but to consider that the _present_ moment to serve the Lord only is
ours, and that the morrow may never come to _us_.

April 20, 1851. During the whole of the current year, up to this date,
the Lord has so abundantly supplied me with means that there came not
one single case before me in which it would have been desirable to help,
according to the measure of light given to me, or to extend the work,
without my having at the same time ample means for doing so. In the
midst of the great depression of the times, which was so generally felt,
and on account of which, humanly speaking, I also might have been
exceedingly tried for want of means, I, on the contrary, at no period of
the work for the seventeen years previous had a greater abundance of
means. I do on purpose lay stress upon this because I desire that it may
become increasingly known that there is no easier, no better, and no
happier way in the end than God's way, and this in particular also with
regard to the obtaining of means _simply in answer to prayer, without
personal application to any one_.

At the beginning of the year I had more in hand for the orphans than for
many years before, under similar circumstances, the balance for current
expenses on May 26, 1850, being one hundred and fifty pounds seven
shillings tenpence. Yet, much as this was in comparison with what the
balance had generally been before, how small was the amount in reality!
About three hundred persons were connected with the new Orphan House,
who day by day were to be provided with all they needed, besides several
apprentices who also were still to be supported. On this account the one
hundred and fifty pounds in hand would only furnish that which was
needed for about fifteen days, as the average expenses of the orphan
work alone were about ten pounds daily. Place yourself, therefore, dear
reader, in my position. Three hundred persons daily at table, and one
hundred and fifty pounds in hand! Looking at it naturally, it is enough
to make one tremble; but trusting in the living God, as by his grace I
was enabled to do, I had not the least trial of mind, and was assured
that God would as certainly help me as he had done fourteen years
before, when the number of the orphans was only the tenth part as large.

Nov. 27. For seven weeks the income has been very small, in comparison
with what has been expended, both for the orphans and for the various
other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. There has come in
for the orphans £187, 16s. 2¾d., and for the other objects £62, 11s.
1d.; and the expenditure has been for the orphans during these seven
weeks £477, 2s. 11d., and for the various other objects £394, 9s. 8d.
Therefore altogether £871, 12s. 7d. has been expended, whilst the income
altogether has been only £250, 7s. 3¾d. We have, of course, not gone
into debt, as we never order anything except we have the means in hand
for it. Nor has there been even the least difficulty experienced with
regard to means, as the Lord in his kindness had sent in considerable
sums just before this season commenced. About three hundred and thirty
persons now sit down to their meals in the new Orphan House, day by day,
and the expenses for the orphans alone are about ten pounds daily, and
those for the other parts of the work are also about ten pounds daily,
so that I need to receive after the rate of twenty pounds a day, in
order to go on with the work; but during these forty-nine days there has
been only one single day that I have received about twenty pounds, and
for the greater part of the time only a few pounds daily, and sometimes
even only a few shillings. But what was to be done under these
circumstances? I gave myself to prayer. God, whom I have now been
enabled to make my refuge, and my only refuge, for more than twenty
years, I have besought day by day. And when now day by day I still have
received only small sums, and sometimes nothing or scarcely anything at
all, the only effect that it has had upon me has been _to pray the more
earnestly_. My confidence in God is not at all shaken. I have never had
a thought that he would not help me: nor have I even once been allowed
to look upon these seven weeks in any other way than that the Lord, for
the trial of my faith, has ordered it thus that only so little should
come in. I am sure that, when he has tried me sufficiently, there will
come in again larger sums. In the mean time, how good has the Lord been,
not only to have given all I have needed, but I have even now money in
hand! And as to our stores in the new Orphan House, they are as full as
usual. We have at least one hundred and fifty sacks of potatoes in the
house, twenty sacks of flour, thirty-three barrels of oatmeal, each
containing about two hundred pounds, about three hundred pairs of new
shoes (besides about nine hundred pairs in use), about ten tons of
coals, a large quantity of soap and rice; and so all other parts of the
stores in proportion. Indeed, while there has been little coming in, I
have just ordered articles in the wholesale way as formerly, when our
income was perhaps four or five times as much during the same period. My
judgment is, that it will now soon please the Lord again to send in
larger sums, as he has been pleased to exercise my faith for some time
in this way. Let me see the result!

Jan. 4, 1851. This very day the Lord has given me a most precious proof
that he delights in our having large expectations from him. I have
received this evening the sum of three thousand pounds, being the
largest donation which I have had as yet. I now write again that I
expect far larger sums still, in order that it may be yet more and more
manifest that there is no happier, no easier, and no better way of
obtaining pecuniary means for the work of the Lord than the one in which
I have been led. How great my joy in God is, on account of this
donation, cannot be described; but it is not in the least coupled with
excitement. I take this donation out of the hands of the living God; I
continually look for his help, and am perfectly assured that I shall
have it, and therefore is my soul calm and peaceful, without any
excitement, though the donation is so large. This donation is, however,
like a voice from heaven speaking to me concerning a most deeply
important matter respecting which I am seeking guidance from the Lord,
the building of another Orphan House.

May 26. I am brought to the close of this period. The work is more and
more enlarging. During the last month I have paid out for the orphans
more than four hundred and fifty pounds, and for the other objects more
than five hundred pounds, being nearly one thousand pounds during one
month; and yet I have a greater balance left in hand, through the Lord's
kindness, than at the close of any of the previous periods.

From May 26, 1850, to May 26, 1851, there were four day schools in
Bristol, with 286 children in them, _entirely supported_ by the funds of
the Institution; and three others in Devonshire, Gloucestershire, and
Norfolk, with 180 children in them, were _assisted_. Further, one Sunday
school in Bristol, with 184 children, was entirely supported, and two
others in Devonshire and Gloucestershire, with 213 children, were
assisted. Lastly, an adult school in Bristol, with 90 persons in it, was
entirely supported. The expenses connected with all these various
schools were, during this period, £379, 17s. From the formation of the
Institution, on March 5, 1834, up to May 26, 1851, there were 5,343
children in the various day schools in Bristol alone, 2,379 in the
Sunday school, and 1,896 persons in the adult school, besides the
thousands in the schools out of Bristol which were assisted.

There was expended during this period, out of the funds of the
Institution, on the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, £150, 16s. 5d.
There were 345 Bibles sold, and 899 given away; and 30 New Testaments
sold, and 413 given away, during this period. From March 5, 1834, to
May 26, 1851, there were circulated 7,709 Bibles and 4,442 New
Testaments.

During this year was spent of the funds of the Institution, for
missionary objects, the sum of £2,000, 11s. 1d. By this sum forty-five
laborers in the word and doctrine in various parts of the world were to
a greater or less degree assisted. The total amount of £2,000 was sent
to these forty-five servants of the Lord Jesus in 264 different sums.

During this period £358, 7s. 3d. was expended on the circulation of
tracts, and 303,098 tracts and little books were circulated. I was
permitted to send out more tracts than _during the whole of the previous
ten years taken together_. Nor must it be withheld from the reader, as
matter for thankfulness, that the Lord was pleased to allow me to hear
again and again of instances of conversion, by means of the distribution
of these tracts during this period.

On May 26, 1850, there were 275 orphans in the new Orphan House on
Ashley Down, Bristol. On May 26, 1851, there were 300 orphans in the new
Orphan House. The total number of orphans who were under our care from
April, 1836, to May 26, 1851, is 488. There came in altogether during
this year £4,102, 14s. 9¼d. for the support of the orphans, and
£3,640, 9s. 1¾d. for the other objects; and, after having met to the
full every demand with reference to the orphans, the balance of £970,
13s. 11¾d. remained in hand. Also, after having entered into every
door which the Lord was please to set before me respecting the other
objects, and to do far more than during any one year previously, the
balance of £809, 10s. 6d. remained in hand on May 26, 1851. Verily we do
not trust in the Lord in vain!

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £38,018, 4s. 6½d. was given to me for the orphans _as the
result of prayer to God_ from the commencement of the work to May 26,
1851. It may be also interesting to the reader to know that the total
amount which was given as free contributions for the other objects from
the commencement of the work to May 26, 1851, amounted to £13,988, 11s.
9¼d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and tracts, and by
the payments of the children in the day schools, amounted to £2,890, 9s.
11¾d.

It pleased the Lord greatly to gladden our hearts by the working of his
Holy Spirit among the orphans during this period.

Dec. 31, 1850. During this year there have been received into fellowship
57, and altogether, from the time that brother Craik and I began to
labor in Bristol, 1,313. The Lord has been pleased to give me, for my
personal expenses, £402, 4s. 5d.

May 26, 1851. The reader will remember that I stated in a previous
chapter that I purposed, not in dependence upon my Christian friends,
nor in dependence upon former donors, but alone in dependence upon the
living God, to enlarge the orphan work. Before I brought before the
public what I purposed to do, I gave the record of the exercises of my
mind on this subject to a valued Christian friend to read, the only one
who, besides my family, knew anything of this my intention before it
came before the public. I did this particularly in order that, after I
had been waiting for several months in secret upon God for guidance and
direction concerning it, I might also have the counsel of a prayerful,
judicious, and cautious man of God. When this brother returned the
manuscript, he spoke to me words of encouragement concerning this
purpose, and gave me a half sovereign towards the building fund for this
house for seven hundred destitute orphans. This was the first donation,
which I received on May 13, 1851, and which, I confess, was a great
refreshment and encouragement to me, the more so as it came from so
cautious a brother, and after I had been for several months, through
secret prayer, assured that I should go forward.

On May 28, 1851, my intention became publicly known, and in the evening
of May 29 I received from a Christian lady a sovereign towards the
building fund.

June 1. A brother in the Lord, who gives his donations with the letter
"P.," gave me ten shillings. I also received a sovereign. This evening I
received still further four half crowns, with very encouraging words and
expressions of joy that I have been led to this purpose of building
another Orphan House for seven hundred more orphans. There came to hand,
also anonymously, three shillings. Ditto an old shilling, a small
American coin, and two shillings. Also from a Christian servant in
Clifton two shillings sixpence.

June 21. Twenty-four days have now passed away since I have been
enabled, day by day, to wait with a goodly measure of earnestness and in
faith upon the Lord for means; but as yet only a little above
twenty-eight pounds has come in. But I am not discouraged. The less
there comes in, the more earnestly I pray, the more I look out for
answers, and the more assured I am that the Lord, in his own time, after
he has tried my faith, will send me larger sums, and, at last, all I
need.

Aug. 12. Day by day I am waiting upon the Lord for means for this
object, and generally more than once a day am I bowing my knees before
God with reference to it. Moreover, of late I have been enabled, with
increasing earnestness, to beseech the Lord that he would be pleased to
send in means for the building fund. My soul has been all along at
peace, though only so little, as yet, comparatively, has come in (in
all, one hundred and twenty-seven pounds nineteen shillings ninepence);
and though Satan has in the most subtle way sought to shake my
confidence, and to lead me to question whether, after all, I had not
been mistaken concerning this whole matter. Yet, though he has aimed
after this, to the praise of God I have to confess that he has not been
allowed to triumph. I have especially besought the Lord of late that he
would be pleased to refresh my spirit by sending in some large donation
for this part of the work. Under these circumstances I received this
morning five hundred pounds for the new building. I was not in the least
excited. I look out for means. _Even that very moment_, when I received
this donation, I was looking out for means, for large donations; and I
should not have been surprised if five thousand pounds had come in, or
more. The Lord be praised for this precious encouragement, which has
still further quickened me for prayer!

Sept. 13. Patience and faith are still called for, and, by God's grace,
my desire is to "let patience have her perfect work." Not one penny has
come in to-day for the building fund, but five more orphans have been
applied for, so that now forty in less than one single month have been
brought before me, all bereaved of _both_ parents, and all very
destitute. Under these circumstances, how can I but fervently labor in
prayer that the Lord would be pleased to intrust me with means for the
building another Orphan House for seven hundred orphans. The more I look
at things according to natural appearances and prospects, the less
likely is it that I should have the sum which is needed; but I have
faith in God, and my expectation is from him alone. From the beginning I
depended upon him only concerning this proposed enlargement of the work,
and therefore have I not been disappointed, though as yet only the
fortieth part of what is needed has come in (eight hundred and
eighty-two pounds eighteen shillings sevenpence halfpenny). But how
soon, how very soon can the Lord alter the aspect of things. Even this
very evening, while I am writing, he could give me many thousand pounds.
I continue, therefore, to wait upon God, and seek to encourage my heart
by his holy word, and, while he delays giving me answers, to be occupied
in his blessed service. Of this, however, my soul has not the least
doubt, that, when the Lord shall have been pleased to exercise my soul
by the trial of faith and patience, he will make bare his arm, and send
help. The fact that the applications for the admission of destitute
orphans are so many, does both quicken me to prayer, and is also a great
encouragement to me that the Lord will give me the desire of my heart,
to provide another home for these destitute, fatherless and motherless
children.

March 17, 1852. Day by day I am waiting upon God for means. With full
confidence, both as to the power of the Lord to give me the means, and
likewise his willingness, I am enabled to continue to wait. But he is
pleased to exercise my faith and patience, and especially has this been
the case of late. Not more than twenty-seven pounds eleven shillings has
come in during the last four weeks for the building fund. Yet, amidst it
all, by the help of God, my heart has been kept looking to the Lord, and
expecting help from him. Now to-day my heart has been greatly refreshed
by a donation of nine hundred and ninety-nine pounds thirteen shillings
fivepence. I cannot describe to any one how refreshing this donation is
to my spirit. After having been for weeks, day by day, waiting upon the
Lord, and receiving so little comparatively, either for current expenses
or for the building fund, this answer to many prayers is exceedingly
sweet to my spirit.

May 20. There remained in hand from the _former_ building fund the
balance of £776, 14s. 4¾d., which I added to the _present_ building
fund, so that on the evening of May 26, 1852, I had altogether £3,530,
9s. 0¼d.

_Supplies for the School, Bible, Missionary, and Tract Fund, sent in
answer to prayer from May 26, 1851, to May 26, 1852._--At no time during
the past eighteen years did I begin a new period with so much money in
hand as was the case at the commencement of this. There was a balance of
£809, 10s. 6d. left for _these_ objects. Long before this balance was
expended, however, the Lord was pleased to send in further supplies; so
that during all the year there did not come before me one single
instance in which, according to my judgment, it would have been
desirable to help forward schools or missionary objects, or the
circulation of the Holy Scriptures and tracts, but I had always the
means in hand for doing so.

_Supplies for the Support of the Orphans sent in answer to prayer from
May 26, 1851, to May 26, 1852._--When this period commenced, I had in
hand for the current expenses for the orphans £970, 13s. 11¾d. We had
never had so large a balance for the other objects at the commencement
of any new period as was the case at the commencement of this, and so it
was also with regard to the orphan work. But though there was this large
balance to begin with, dependence upon God was still required day by
day, as the _pecuniary_ help is only a very small part of that which is
needed; and even as to means, this sum would not have lasted long, had
the Lord not sent in further supplies. This, however, he did; and thus
it was that while there were other trials, varied and many, yet, as to
means, we experienced scarcely any difficulty at all.

During the period from May 26, 1851, to May 26, 1852, there were
_entirely supported_ by the funds of the Institution four day schools in
Bristol, with 248 poor children in them, and three others in Devonshire,
Monmouthshire, and Norfolk, were _assisted_. Further, one Sunday school
in Bristol, with 243 children, was entirely supported, and two others
in Devonshire and Gloucestershire, with 230 children, were assisted.
Lastly, one adult school in Bristol, with 120 adult scholars, was
entirely supported during this period. From March 5, 1834, up to May 26,
1852, there were 5,525 children in the day schools in Bristol, 2,600 in
the Sunday school, and 2,033 grown-up persons in the adult school. There
was expended of the funds of the Institution, for these various schools,
during this period, £360, 1s. 9d.

During this period there was expended of the funds of the Institution
£207, 3s. 1d. for the purpose of circulating the Holy Scriptures,
especially among the very poorest of the poor. There were issued during
this period 1,101 Bibles and 409 New Testaments. There were altogether
circulated from March 5, 1834, up to May 26, 1852, 8,810 Bibles, and
4,851 New Testaments.

During this year there was spent of the funds of the Institution, for
missionary objects, the sum of £2,005, 7s. 5d. By this sum fifty-one
laborers in the word and doctrine, in various parts of the world, were
to a greater or less degree assisted.

There was laid out for the circulation of tracts, from May 26, 1851, to
May 26, 1852, the sum of £356, 11s. 3½d. There were circulated during
the year 489,136 tracts.

The total number of tracts which were circulated from the beginning up
to May 26, 1852, was 1,086,366.

On May 26, 1851, there were 300 orphans in the new Orphan House on
Ashley Down, Bristol. From that day up to May 26, 1852, there were
admitted into it 27 orphans. The total of the expenses connected with
the support of the orphans, from May 26, 1851, to May 26, 1852, was
£3,035, 3s. 4d. The total number of orphans who were under our care from
April, 1836, to May 26, 1852, was 515.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £42,970, 17s. 6d. was given to me for the orphans _as the
result of prayer to God_ from the commencement of the work up to May 26,
1852. It may be also interesting to the reader to know that the total
amount which was given as free contributions, for the other objects,
from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1852, amounted to
£15,976, 10s. 6¼d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and
tracts, and by the payments of the children in the day schools, amounted
to £3,073, 1s. 9¾d. Besides this, also, a great variety and number of
articles of clothing, furniture, provisions, etc., were given for the
use of the orphans.

Several of the orphans who left the establishment during this year went
away as believers, having been converted some time before they left; one
also who died gave very decided evidence of a true change of heart by
faith in our Lord Jesus; several who in former years were under our
care, as we heard during this year, took their stand openly on the
Lord's side, and dated their first impressions to the instructions
received whilst under our care; and, lastly, of those under our care,
there were not a few whose spiritual state gave us joy and comfort.
Thus, amidst many difficulties and trials and some discouragements, we
had abundant cause to praise God for his goodness, and to go forward in
the strength of the Lord.

Dec. 31, 1851. During this year the Lord was pleased to give me, for my
personal expenses, £465, 13s. 1¾d.




CHAPTER XXII.

REAPING IN JOY.

1852-1854.

    EXPECTING GREAT THINGS FROM GOD--MUNIFICENT DONATION--INCREASING
    USEFULNESS OF THE SCRIPTURAL KNOWLEDGE INSTITUTION--ACCESS TO
    GOD THROUGH FAITH IN CHRIST--A VOICE FROM MOUNT LEBANON--BENEFIT
    OF WAITING GOD'S TIME--CAREFUL STEWARDSHIP--FAITH, THE ONLY
    RELIANCE--"THIS POOR WIDOW HATH CAST IN MORE THAN THEY
    ALL"--GREATER ACHIEVEMENTS OF FAITH ANTICIPATED--COUNSEL TO
    TRACT DISTRIBUTORS--A NEW AND SEVERE TRIAL OF FAITH.


    On May 26, 1852, there was in hand toward the erection of the
    second new Orphan House three thousand five hundred and thirty
    pounds nine shillings sixpence and one farthing. Donations
    varying in amount from three hundred pounds to fourpence
    continued to be received in answer to prayer. On the 4th of Jan.
    1853, Mr. M.  writes:--

From London two shillings sixpence. Day by day I have now been waiting
upon God for means for the building fund for more than nineteen months,
and almost daily I have received something in answer to prayer. These
donations have been, for the most part, small, in comparison with the
amount which will be required for the completion of this object;
nevertheless, they have shown that the Lord, for the sake of his dear
Son, listens to my supplications, and to those of my fellow-laborers and
helpers in the work; and they have been precious encouragements to me to
continue to wait upon God. I have been for many months assured that the
Lord, in his own time, would give larger sums for this work; and for
this I have been more and more earnestly entreating him during the last
months. Now at last he has abundantly refreshed my spirit, and answered
my request. I received to-day the promise that, as _the joint donation
of several Christians_, there should be paid me a donation of eight
thousand and one hundred pounds, for the work of the Lord in my hands.

It is impossible to describe the spiritual refreshment which my heart
received through this donation. Day by day, for nineteen months, I had
been looking out for more abundant help than I had had. I was fully
assured that God would help me with larger sums; yet the delay was long.
See how precious it is to wait upon God! See how those who do so are not
confounded! Their faith and patience may long and sharply be tried; but
in the end it will most assuredly be seen that those who honor God he
will honor, and will not suffer them to be put to shame. The largeness
of the donation, whilst it exceedingly refreshed my spirit, did not in
the least surprise me; _for I expect_ GREAT _things from God_. Have I
been boasting in God in vain? Is it not manifest that it is most
precious in every way to depend upon God? Do I serve God for naught? Is
it not obvious that the principles on which I labor are not only
applicable to the work of God _on a small scale_, but also, as I have so
many times affirmed during the past nineteen years, _for the most
extensive operations for God_?

    During the year ending May 26, 1853, nine thousand and one
    pounds three shillings was received toward the building fund,
    making the present amount of that fund twelve thousand five
    hundred and thirty-one pounds twelve shillings one farthing.

For the various objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, viz.
for school, missionary, Bible, and tract purposes, I had to expend
during the year from May, 1852, to May, 1853, about six hundred pounds
per month, or above seven thousand pounds in all; but I had sufficient
to meet every demand; and over and above I was helped by the Lord to
increase the building fund nine thousand pounds. The current expenses of
the Institution were never so great during the previous nineteen years;
but the extent of its operations, and the means which the Lord was
pleased to send in, were also never so great.

You see, dear reader, that we are richly recompensed for our waiting
upon God. You perceive the readiness of his heart to listen to the
supplications of his children who put their trust in him. If you have
never made trial of it, do so now. But in order to have your prayers
answered, you need to make your requests unto God on the ground of the
merits and worthiness of the Lord Jesus. You must not depend upon your
own worthiness and merits, but solely on the Lord Jesus, as the ground
of acceptance before God, for your person, for your prayers, for your
labors, and for everything else. Do you really believe in Jesus? Do you
verily depend upon him alone for the salvation of your soul? See to it
well, that not the least degree of your own righteousness is presented
unto God as a ground of acceptance. But then, if you believe in the Lord
Jesus, it is further necessary, in order that your prayers may be
answered, that the things which you ask God should be of such a kind
that God can give them to you, because they are for his honor and your
real good. If the obtaining of your requests were not for your real
good, or were not tending to the honor of God, you might pray for a long
time without obtaining what you desire. The glory of God should be
always before the children of God, in what they desire at his hands; and
their own spiritual profit, being so intimately connected with the honor
of God, should never be lost sight of in their petitions. But now,
suppose we are believers in the Lord Jesus, and suppose we make our
requests unto God, depending alone on the Lord Jesus as the ground of
having them granted; suppose also, that, so far as we are able honestly
and uprightly to judge, the obtaining of our requests would be for our
real spiritual good, and for the honor of God; we yet need, lastly, to
_continue_ in prayer until the blessing is granted unto us. It is not
enough to begin to pray, nor to pray aright; nor is it enough to
continue _for a time_ to pray; but we must patiently, believingly
continue in prayer until we obtain an answer; and, further, we have not
only _to continue_ in prayer unto the end, but we have also _to believe_
that God does hear us, and will answer our prayers. Most frequently we
fail _in not continuing_ in prayer until the blessing is obtained, and
_in not expecting_ the blessing. As assuredly as in any individual these
various points are found united together, so assuredly will answers be
granted to his requests.

During the year 1852-53, the expense of the support of the orphans was
fully met by unsolicited donations. Two or three particulars only will
be given.

June 29, 1852. To-day I received one of the most remarkable donations
which I ever had. I give the whole account, without the name of the
donor.

                                             LYONS, JUNE 24, 1852,

    DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:

    It is now several years that I read with great interest, and I
    hope with some benefit to my soul, the account of your labors
    and experiences. Ever since then your work was the object of
    many thoughts and prayers, and I gave many copies of your book
    to Christian friends. One of them has read it in Syria, on Mount
    Lebanon, where he is for commercial business; and, whilst
    praying for you and your dear orphans, the Lord put it in his
    heart to send you two pounds, to which my husband added two
    others; and we beg you to accept that small offering in the name
    of the Lord. If you have published anything of the Lord's
    dealings with you since the year 1844, we shall be very happy to
    receive it. You could forward it to Messrs. * * * *, London, for
    * * * * of Lyons. And now, dear brother, may the grace and peace
    of the Lord rest on you and your dear home's inhabitants.

            Affectionately yours in the Lord,
                                             * * * *

I have had donations from Australia, the East Indies, the West Indies,
the United States, Canada, from the Cape of Good Hope, from France,
Switzerland, Germany, Italy, etc.; and now comes also this donation from
Mount Lebanon, with the prayer of a Christian brother whose name I never
heard nor know even now. See, dear reader, this is the way in which the
Lord has helped me in this precious service for twenty-two years. With
my fellow-laborers, or without them, and they without me, our prayers
are offered up unto the Lord for help, and he is pleased, for Jesus'
sake, to listen to our supplications, and to influence the hearts of
some of his children, known to us or not, to send us help. The donors
may be rich or poor; they may live near, or at a distance of more than
ten thousand miles; they may give much or little; they may have often
given before, or never; they may be well known to us, or not at all: in
these and many other things there may be constant variations; but God
continually helps us; we are never confounded. And why not? Simply
because we are enabled by the grace of God to put our trust in him for
what we need.

Oct. 9. This morning Luke vii. came in the course of my reading before
breakfast. While reading the account about the centurion and the raising
from death of the widow's son at Nain, I lifted up my heart to the Lord
Jesus thus: "Lord Jesus, thou hast the same power now. Thou canst
provide me with means for thy work in my hands. Be pleased to do so."
About half an hour afterwards I received two hundred and thirty pounds
fifteen shillings; also one shilling. This two hundred and thirty pounds
fifteen shillings was left at my disposal, as most needed. I took one
half of it for the current expenses for the orphans, and the other half
for the other objects. I am now amply provided for meeting the demands
of this day.

The joy which such answers to prayer afford cannot be described. I was
determined to wait upon God only, and not to work an unscriptural
deliverance for myself. I have thousands of pounds for the building
fund; but I would not take of it, because it was once set apart for that
object. There is also a legacy of one hundred pounds for the orphans two
months overdue, in the prospect of the payment of which the heart might
be naturally inclined to use some money from the building fund, to be
replaced by the legacy money, when it comes in; but I would not thus
step out of God's way of obtaining help. At the very time when this
donation arrived, I had packed up one hundred pounds which I happened to
have in hand, received for the building fund, in order to take it to the
bank, as I was determined not to touch it, but to wait upon God. My soul
does magnify the Lord for his goodness!

This last paragraph is copied out of my journal, written down at the
time. I add a few words more to the last sentences.

The natural mind is ever prone _to reason_, when we ought _to believe_;
to be _at work_, when we ought to be _quiet_; to go our own way, when we
ought steadily to walk on in God's ways, however trying to nature. When
I was first converted, I should have said, What harm can there be to
take some of the money which has been put by for the building fund? God
will help me again after some time with means for the orphans, and then
I can replace it. Or, there is this money due for the legacy of one
hundred pounds. This money is quite sure; may I not, therefore, on the
strength of it, take some of the money from the building fund, and, when
the legacy is paid, replace the money which I have taken? From what I
have seen of believers, I know that many would act thus. But how does it
work, when we thus anticipate God, by going our own way? We bring, in
many instances, guilt on our conscience; but if not, we certainly weaken
faith instead of increasing it; and each time we work thus a deliverance
of our own we find it more and more difficult to trust in God, till at
last we give way entirely to our natural fallen reason, and unbelief
prevails. How different, if one is enabled to wait God's own time, and
to look alone to him for help and deliverance! When at last help comes,
after many seasons of prayer it may be, and after much exercise of faith
and patience it may be, how sweet it is, and what a present recompense
does the soul at once receive for trusting in God, and waiting patiently
for his deliverance! Dear Christian reader, if you have never walked in
this path of obedience before, do so now, and you will then know
experimentally the sweetness of the joy which results from it.

Oct. 12. By sale of rags and bones twelve shillings sixpence. I copy
literally from the receipt book. We seek to make the best of
everything. As a steward of public money, I feel it right that even
these articles should be turned into money; nor could we expect answers
to our prayers if _knowingly_ there were any waste allowed in connection
with this work. For just because the money is received from God, simply
in answer to prayer only, therefore it becomes us the more to be careful
in the use of it.

From Dec. 20, 1852, to Jan. 4, 1853, we had nothing in advance of our
wants. Means came in only as they were required for pressing needs. But
on the 4th January, we received, as stated under another head, the
largest donation I ever had, of which I took six hundred pounds for the
support of the orphans. These facts I state, in order to give a
practical illustration that those are entirely mistaken who suppose that
the work is now _no longer_ a work of faith, as it used to be in former
years. It is true, we have now a larger income than we used to have in
the years 1838, 1839, and 1840; but it is also true that our expenses
are three times as great. We have no regular income now, even as we had
not then. We ask no human being now for help; even as we did not then.
We depend alone upon God, by his grace; even as we did then. Who is
there in the whole world who will state that I ever asked him for help
in this orphan work, from its commencement, on Dec. 9, 1835, up till
now? Now, as we have no funds to live upon; as we have no regular
subscribers or donors upon whom we could depend; as we never ask help
from man, but God alone; and as, finally, we never did go into debt for
this work, nor do we now: why is it not now a work of faith, as
formerly? Will those who say it is not, place themselves in the position
in which I was, when, at the close of the year 1852, I had not two
pounds left, and about three hundred and thirty persons were day by day
to be provided for, with all they need, and prove whether it is now
anything else than a work of faith? But perhaps I have said too much
about this. For every one, except those who are _determined_ not to see,
will have no difficulty in perceiving that now, as formerly, one could
only be kept from being overwhelmed in such a position by looking day by
day to the Lord, and that not merely for pecuniary supplies, but for
help under the numberless difficulties which continually are met with in
such a work.

How can I sufficiently praise, and adore, and magnify the Lord for his
love and faithfulness in carrying me thus from year to year through this
his service, supplying me with all I need in the way of means,
fellow-laborers, mental strength, and, above all, spiritual support! But
for his help and support I should be completely overpowered in a very
short time; yet, by his help I go on, and am very happy, spiritually, in
my service; nor am I now generally worse in health than I was twenty
years ago, but rather better.

During the year 1852-53, there were four day schools, with 235 children
in them, entirely supported by the funds of the Institution. Further,
one Sunday school in Bristol, with 150 children, was entirely supported,
and three others in Devonshire, Somersetshire, and Gloucestershire, with
280 children, were assisted. Lastly, one adult school, with 103 adult
scholars, was entirely supported by the funds of the Institution. There
were under our care, from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1853, in the various
day schools 5,686 children, in the Sunday schools 2,673 children, and in
the adult school 2,132 persons. There was expended of the funds of the
Institution during this year, for the various schools, £349, 12s. 11d.

During this year there was laid out of the funds of the Institution, on
the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, £431, 5s, 1½d., and there
were circulated 1,666 Bibles and 1,210 New Testaments. There were
circulated from March 5, 1834, up to May 26, 1853, 10,476 Bibles, and
6,061 New Testaments.

For several years past this part of the work has appeared more and more
important to me on account of the fearful attempts which have been made
by the powers of darkness to rob the church of Christ of the Holy
Scriptures. I have on this account sought to embrace every opportunity
to circulate the Holy Scriptures in England, Ireland, Canada, British
Guiana, the East Indies, China, Australia, etc. Every open door which
the Lord was pleased to set before me in these or other parts of the
world, I have joyfully entered; yea, I have counted it a privilege,
indeed, to be permitted of God to send forth his Holy Word. Many
servants of Christ, in various parts of the world, have assisted me in
this service, through whose instrumentality copies of the Holy
Scriptures have been circulated.

During this year there was spent of the funds of the Institution for
missionary objects £2,234, 2s. 6d. By this sum fifty-four laborers in
the word and doctrine, in various parts of the world, were to a greater
or less degree assisted.

There was laid out for the circulation of tracts, from May 26, 1852, to
May 26, 1853, the sum of £555, 16s. 7½d.; and there were circulated
within this year 733,674 tracts.

The total number of tracts which were circulated up to May 26, 1853, was
1,820,040. From Nov. 19, 1840, to May 10, 1842, the first period that
the circulation of tracts was in operation in connection with the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad, there were
circulated 19,609; from May 26, 1851, to May 26, 1852, 489,136; and
during this period 733,674.

At the beginning of this period there were 300 orphans in the new Orphan
House on Ashley Down, Bristol. During the year there were admitted into
it 13 orphans, making 313 in all. The total number of orphans who were
under our care from April, 1836, to May 26, 1853, was 528.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £55,408, 17s. 5¾d. was given to me for the orphans, _as
the result of prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to
May 26, 1853. It may be also interesting to the reader to know that the
total amount which was given for the other objects, from the
commencement of the work up to May 26, 1853, amounted to £19,163, 14s.
1½d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and tracts, and by
the payments of the children in the day schools, amounted to £3,490, 7s.
1¼d. Besides this, also, a great variety and number of articles of
clothing, furniture, provisions, etc., were given _for the use_ of the
orphans.

The expenses in connection with the support of the 300 orphans and the
apprentices during this year were £3,453, 15s. 1½d.

Dec. 31, 1852. During this year there have been received into fellowship
35 believers. The Lord has been pleased to give unto me £445, 8s.
8½d.

My brother-in-law, Mr. A. N. Groves, of whom mention has been made in
the first part of this Narrative, as having been helpful to me by his
example when I began my labors in England in 1829, in that he, without
any visible support, and without being connected with any missionary
society, went with his wife and children to Bagdad, as a missionary,
after having given up a lucrative practice of about one thousand five
hundred pounds per year, returned in autumn 1852, from the East Indies,
a third time, being exceedingly ill. He lived, however, till May 20,
1853, when, after a most blessed testimony for the Lord, he fell asleep
in Jesus in my house.

I have already stated that on May 26, 1853, I had on hand toward
building premises large enough for the accommodation of 700 children,
the sum of £12,531, 12s. 0¼d.

    A single circumstance will illustrate the widely diverse sources
    from which donations are received, as well as the great
    disparity in amount.

Jan. 17, 1854. From S. R. and E. R., two poor factory girls, near
Stroud, 1s. 7d. This day I also received the promise that there should
be paid to me, for the work of the Lord in my hands, £5,207, to be
disposed of as I might consider best.

The whole amount received for the new Orphan House, during the year
closing May 26, 1854, was £5,285, 17s. 5d., which made the total of
£17,816, 19s. 5¼d. in hand on May 26, 1854.

During this year the current expenses for the various objects of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad amounted to £7,507,
0s. 11½d., being £471, 8s. 11d. more than during any previous year;
yet the Lord not only enabled me to meet them all, but to add the sum of
£5,285, 7s. 5d. to the building fund.

There is yet a large sum required before I shall be enabled to build
another house for 700 orphans; nor have I now, any more than at the
first, any natural prospect of obtaining what is yet needed; but my hope
is in the living God. When I came to the conclusion that it was the will
of God that I should build another Orphan House, I had not only no
natural prospect of obtaining the £35,000 which would be needed for this
object, but also I had no natural prospect of being able to provide for
the necessities of the three hundred orphans already under my care.
Three years have elapsed since then, and I have had all I needed for
them, amounting to about £10,500; and £17,816, 19s. 5¼d. I have
received for the building fund. May I not well trust in the Lord for
what is yet needed for the building fund? By his grace I will do so, and
delight in doing so; for I know that at last all my prayers will be
turned into praises concerning this part of the service.

There is one point which is particularly an encouragement to me to go on
waiting upon the Lord for the remainder of the means which are required,
viz: applications for the admission of orphans _continue_ to be made. On
May 26, 1853, there were 480 orphans waiting for admission. Since then
181 more have been applied for, making in all 661. These children are
from three months old and upwards, and all bereaved of both parents by
death.

During the year now under review I received the following donation for
the missionary laborers, under circumstances of peculiar interest.

On Aug. 9, 1853, I received a letter from a Christian brother,
accompanied with an order for eighty-eight pounds two shillings sixpence
on his bankers, of which three pounds two shillings sixpence were the
proceeds of an orphan box in a meeting-place of believers, and
eighty-five pounds from a poor widow who had sold her little house,
being all her property, and who had put ninety pounds, the total amount
of what she had received, into that orphan box two months before, on
June 9, 1853. In this box the money had been for some time, without its
being known, till the orphan box was opened, and the ninety pounds with
a few lines without name were found in it. As, however, the fact of her
intending to sell the little house, and her intention of sending me the
money for the Lord's work, had been known to the brother who sent me the
money, he did not feel free to send it to me without remonstrating with
her through two brethren, whom he sent with the money, offering it again
to her; for he knew her to be very poor, and feared that this might be
an act of excitement, and therefore be regretted afterwards. These
brethren could not prevail on her to receive back the money, but they
did _persuade_ her to receive back five pounds of the amount, and then
the brother referred to felt no longer free to keep the money from me,
and hence sent me the eighty-five pounds.

On the receipt of this, I wrote at once to the poor godly widow,
offering her the travelling expenses for coming to Bristol, that I might
have personal intercourse with her; for I feared lest this should be an
act of excitement, and the more so, as she had received back five pounds
of the sum. This sister in the Lord, a widow of about sixty years of
age, came to Bristol, and told me in all simplicity how that ten years
before, in the year 1843, she had purposed that if ever she should come
into the possession of the little house in which she lived with her
husband, she would sell it, and give the proceeds of it to the Lord.
About five years afterwards her husband died, and she, having no
children, nor any one having particular claim upon her, then sought to
dispose of her little property, as had been her mind all those years
before. However, one difficulty after another prevented her being able
to effect a sale. At last she felt in particular difficulty on account
of her inability to pay the yearly ground-rent of the little house and
garden, and she asked the Lord to enable her to sell the property, in
order that she might be able to carry out her desire which she had had
for ten years, to give to him the proceeds of this her possession. He
now helped her. The house was sold, the money paid, and she put the
whole ninety pounds into the orphan box for me, being assured that the
Lord would direct me how best the money might be used for him. I still
questioned her again and again, to find out whether it was not
excitement which had led her to act as she had done; but I not only saw
that her mind had been fully decided about this act for ten years
before, but that she also was able to answer from the word of God all
the objections which I purposely made, in order to probe her, whether
she had intelligently and from right motives acted in what she had done.
At last I was fully satisfied that it was not from impulse, nor under
excitement, that she had given the money. I next stated to her something
like this: "You are poor, and you are about sixty years old, therefore
decreasing in strength, and may you not therefore keep this money for
yourself?" Her reply was, as nearly as I remember, something like this:
"God has always provided for me, and I have no doubt he will do so in
future also. I am able to work and to earn my bread as well as others,
and am willing to work as a nurse, or in any other way." What could I
say against this? This is just what a child of God would say, and should
say. But the greatest of all the difficulties to the accepting of the
eighty-five pounds remained in my mind, and I state it, as I relate the
whole for the profit of the reader. It was this. The house had been sold
for ninety pounds. The whole amount had been put into the box, but, on
the persuasion of those two brethren who were requested to remonstrate
with this widow, she had been induced to take back five pounds out of
the ninety pounds. I therefore said to myself, might she not be willing,
after a time, to take back the whole ninety pounds; how, therefore, can
I feel happy in accepting this money? On this account I particularly
laid stress upon this point, and told her that I feared she might regret
her act altogether after some time, as she had taken back this five
pounds. I now learned the circumstances under which she had been induced
to take back this five pounds.

The two brethren who had called on her for the purpose of pointing out
to her the propriety of receiving back again the ninety pounds, or part
of it, told her that Barnabas sold his land, but afterwards lived with
others on that which he and others had thrown into the common stock,
and that, therefore, she might receive at least part of the ninety
pounds back again, if she would not take the whole. She then said to
herself that, "as a child of God, she might take the children's
portion," and, as she had given to God this ninety pounds, she might
receive five pounds back again. She told me that she considered the
brethren had shown her from the Holy Scriptures what she might do, and
therefore she had taken this five pounds. I did not myself agree with
the judgment of those brethren who had said this (as there is no
evidence that Barnabas ever was supported out of the common stock, the
proceeds of the sale of houses and lands, out of which the poor were
supported); but I purposely said nothing to the widow, lest she should
at once be induced to give me this five pounds also. She had, however,
this five pounds untouched, and showed it to me; and before she left she
would make me take one pound of it for the benefit of the orphans, which
I did not refuse, as I had no intention of keeping the eighty-five
pounds. She also gave me a sixpence for the orphans, which some one had
given her for herself, a few days before.

I now asked her, as this matter concerning the retaining of the five
pounds was satisfactorily explained, as far as it respected her own
state of heart, what she wished me to do with the money, in case I saw
it right to keep it. Her reply was that she would leave that with me,
that God would direct me concerning it; but that, if she said anything
at all about it, she should most like it to be used for the support of
brethren who labor in the word without any salary, and who hazard their
lives for the name of Christ. She wished _me_ to have a part of the
money; but this I flatly refused, lest I should be evil spoken of in
this matter. I then offered to pay her travelling expenses, as she had
come to me, which she would not accept, as she did not stand in need of
it. In conclusion, I told her that I would now further pray respecting
this matter, and consider what to do concerning it. I then prayed with
this dear, godly woman, commended her to God, separated from her, and
have not seen her since.

I waited from Aug. 9, 1853, to March 7, 1854, when I wrote to her,
offering her back again the whole eighty-five pounds, or a part of it.
On March 9, 1854, just seven months after I had received the money, and
just nine months after she had actually given it, and ten years and nine
months after she had made the resolution to give her house and garden to
God, I heard from her, stating that she was of the same mind as she had
been for years. I therefore disposed of the money, to aid such foreign
missionary brethren as, according to the best of my knowledge, resembled
most the class of men whom she wished to assist.

The reasons why I have so minutely dwelt upon this circumstance are: 1.
If, as a steward of the bounties of the children of God, I should be
blamed for receiving from a poor widow almost literally her all, it may
be seen in what manner I did so. To have refused on March 9, 1854, also,
would be going beyond what I should be warranted to do. 2. I desired,
also, to give a practical illustration that I only desire donations in
God's way. It is not the money only I desire; but the money received in
answer to prayer, in God's order. 3. This circumstance illustrates how
God helps me often in the most unexpected manner. 4. I have also related
this instance that there may be a fresh proof that even in these last
days the love of Christ is of constraining power, and may work mightily,
as in the days of the apostles. I have witnessed _many_ such instances
as this, in the twenty years during which I have been occupied in this
my service. Let us give thanks to God for such cases, and let us seek
for grace rather to imitate such godly men and women, than think that
they are going too far. I cannot, however, dismiss this subject,
without commending this poor widow to the prayers of all who love our
Lord Jesus, that she may be kept humble, lest, thinking highly of
herself, on account of what she has been enabled to do, by the grace of
God, she should not only lose blessing in her own soul, but this
circumstance should become a snare to her. Pray also, believing reader,
that she may never be allowed to regret what she has done for the Lord.

    After giving in detail the sources and manner of supply for the
    maintenance of the orphans during twenty-four days, Mr. M.  adds:--

The particular end why I have been so minute, is, _to show that the work
is now, as much as ever, a work carried on entirely in dependence upon
the living God, who alone is our hope, and to whom alone we look for
help, and who never has forsaken us in the hour of need_. There is,
however, one thing different with reference to this year, when compared
with former years, and that is, that, while our trials of faith during
this year were just as great as in previous years, the amount needed in
former times was never so great as during this year, especially as the
bread during the greater part of this year was about twice as dear as
for several years before.

But then, it may be said, If you have had this trial of faith, with
these three hundred orphans, why do you seek to build another Orphan
House for seven hundred more, and thus have a thousand to care for? Will
you not have still greater trials of faith?

My reply is: 1. God has never failed me all the twenty years of this my
service. 2. I am going on as easily now, with three hundred orphans, as
with thirty, the number with which I commenced. Their number is ten
times as large as it was at the first; but God has always helped me. 3.
Trials of faith were anticipated, yea, were one chief end of the work,
for the profit of the church of Christ at large. 4. I had courage given
me to go forward, solely in dependence upon God, being assured that he
would help me; yet I waited in secret upon him for six months before I
made this my intention known, in order that I might not take a hasty
step; and I have never regretted my having gone forward. 5. But it needs
to be added that the very abundance which the Lord gave me at the time,
when my mind was exercised about this matter, was a great confirmation
to me that I had not mistaken his mind. And even during this year, how
great has been his help; for the income for the work altogether has been
twelve thousand seven hundred and eighty-five pounds fifteen shillings
sevenpence halfpenny. I am, therefore, assured that the Lord will, in
his own time, not only allow me to build another Orphan House, but that
he will also, when he shall have been pleased to fill it, find the means
to provide for these children.

During this year four day schools, with 202 children, were _entirely
supported_ by the funds of the Institution. Further, one Sunday school
in Bristol, with 137 children, was _entirely supported_, and three
others in Devonshire, Somersetshire, and Gloucestershire, with 300
children, were _assisted_. Lastly, one adult school, with 154 adult
scholars, was _entirely_ supported. The total amount which was spent
during this year in connection with these schools was £359, 15s.
10½d. The number of all the children who were under our care merely
in the schools which were _entirely_ supported by this Institution, from
March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1854, was 5,817 in the day schools, 2,748 in
the Sunday schools, and 2,315 persons in the adult school.

During this year was expended on the circulation of the Holy Scriptures,
of the funds of the Institution, £433, 2s. 9d. There were circulated
during this year 1,890 Bibles and 1,288 New Testaments; and from the
commencement of the work up to May 26, 1854, 12,366 Bibles and 7,349
Testaments.

During this year there was spent of the funds of the Institution, for
missionary objects, the sum of £2,249, 10s. 8½d. By this sum
fifty-six laborers in the word and doctrine, in various parts of the
world, were to a greater or less degree assisted.

During this year, the Lord was pleased to bless again abundantly the
labors of many of those servants of Christ who were assisted through the
funds of this Institution, and this has been the case in foreign
countries as well as at home.

There was laid out for the circulation of tracts, from May 26, 1853, to
May 26, 1854, the sum of £563, 5s. 0½d.; and there were circulated
869,636 tracts.

The total number of all the tracts which were circulated from the
beginning up to May 26, 1854, was 2,689,676.

We desire to be grateful to the Lord that during no period previously we
were enabled to circulate more tracts, and more copies of the Holy
Scriptures, and to aid to a greater degree missionary labors, than
during this period; yet we would not rest in that. It is the blessing of
the Lord upon our labors which we need, which we desire, and which by
his grace we also seek.

If any of the Christian readers are in the habit of circulating tracts,
and yet have never seen fruit, may I suggest to them the following hints
for their prayerful consideration. 1. Seek for such a state of heart,
through prayer and meditation on the Holy Scriptures, as that you are
willing to let God have all the honor, if any good is accomplished by
your service. If you desire for yourself the honor, yea, though it were
in part only, you oblige the Lord, so to speak, to put you as yet aside
as a vessel not meet for the Master's use. One of the greatest
qualifications for usefulness in the service of the Lord is a heart
truly desirous of getting honor for him. 2. Precede all your labors with
earnest, diligent prayer; go to them in a prayerful spirit; and follow
them by prayer. Do not rest on the number of tracts you have given. A
million of tracts may not be the means of converting one single soul;
and yet how great, beyond calculation, may be the blessing which results
from one single tract. Thus it is also with regard to the circulation of
the Holy Scriptures, and the ministry of the word itself. Expect, then,
everything from the blessing of the Lord, and nothing at all from your
own exertions. 3. And yet, at the same time, labor, press into every
open door, be instant in season and out of season, as if everything
depended upon your labors. This, as has been stated before, is one of
the great secrets in connection with successful service for the Lord: to
work, as if everything depended upon our diligence, and yet not to rest
in the least upon our exertions, but upon the blessing of the Lord. 4.
This blessing of the Lord, however, should not merely be sought in
prayer, but it should also be _expected, looked for, continually looked
for_; and the result will be that we shall surely have it. 5. But
suppose that, for the trial of our faith, this blessing were for a long
time withheld from our sight; or suppose, even, that we should have to
fall asleep before we see much good resulting from our labors; yet will
our labors, if carried on in such a way and spirit as has been stated,
be at last abundantly owned, and we shall have a rich harvest in the day
of Christ.

At the beginning of this period there were 300 orphans in the new Orphan
House on Ashley Down, Bristol. During the year there were admitted into
it 30 orphans, making 330 in all. The total number of orphans who were
under our care from April, 1836, to May 26, 1854, was 558.

The expenses during this year for the support of the orphans were
£3,897, 2s. 0½d.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £64,591, 6s. 11¼d. was given to me for the orphans, _as
the result of prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to
May 26, 1854. It may be also interesting to the reader to know that the
total amount which was given for the other objects, from the
commencement of the work up to May 26, 1854, amounted to £22,268, 2s.
11¼d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and tracts, and
by the payments of the children in the day schools, from the
commencement up to May 26, 1854, amounted to £3,989, 4s. 5¾d.

Our labors continued to be blessed among the orphans. We saw also again
fruit of our labors, during this year, with regard to orphans who
formerly were under our care.

In July, 1853, it pleased the Lord to try my faith in a way in which
before it had not been tried. My beloved daughter, an only child, and a
believer since the commencement of the year 1846, was taken ill on June
20. This illness, at first a low fever, turned to typhus. On July 3
there seemed no hope of her recovery. Now was the trial of faith. But
faith triumphed. My beloved wife and I were enabled to give her up into
the hands of the Lord. He sustained us both exceedingly. But I will only
speak about myself. Though my only and beloved child was brought near
the grave, yet was my soul in perfect peace, satisfied with the will of
my heavenly Father, being assured that he would only do that for her and
her parents which in the end would be the best. She continued very ill
till about July 20, when restoration began. On Aug. 18 she was so far
restored that she could be removed to Clevedon, for change of air,
though exceedingly weak. It was then fifty-nine days since she was first
taken ill.

While I was in this affliction, this great affliction, besides being at
peace, as far as the Lord's dispensation was concerned, I also felt
perfectly at peace with regard to the cause of the affliction. When in
August, 1831, the hand of the Lord was heavily laid on me in my family,
as related in the first part of this Narrative, I had not the least
hesitation in knowing that it was the Father's rod, applied in infinite
wisdom and love for the restoration of my soul from a state of
lukewarmness. At this time, however, I had no such feeling. Conscious as
I was of my manifold weaknesses, failings, and shortcomings, so that I
too would be ready to say with the Apostle Paul, "O wretched man than I
am!" yet I was assured that this affliction was not upon me in the way
of the fatherly rod, but for the trial of my faith. Persons often have,
no doubt, the idea respecting me, that all my trials of faith regard
matters connected with money, though the reverse has been stated by me
very frequently; now, however, the Lord would try my faith concerning
one of my dearest earthly treasures, yea, next to my beloved wife, the
dearest of all my earthly possessions. Parents know what an only child,
a beloved child, is, and what to believing parents an only child, a
believing child, must be. Well, the Father in heaven said, as it were,
by this his dispensation, Art thou willing to give up this child to me?
My heart responded, As it seems good to thee, my heavenly Father. Thy
will be done. But as our hearts were made willing to give back our
beloved child to him who had given her to us; so he was ready to leave
her to us, and she lived. "Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he
shall give thee the desires of thine heart." Psalm xxxvii. 4. The
desires of my heart were, to retain the beloved daughter, if it were the
will of God; the means to return her were, to be satisfied with the will
of the Lord.

Of all the trials of faith that as yet I have had to pass through, this
was the greatest; and, by God's abundant mercy, I own it to his praise,
I was enabled to delight myself in the will of God; for I felt
perfectly sure that if the Lord took this beloved daughter, it would be
best for her parents, best for herself, and more for the glory of God
than if she lived: this better part I was satisfied with; and thus my
heart had peace, perfect peace, and I had not a moment's anxiety. Thus
would it be under all circumstances, however painful, were the believer
exercising faith.

Dec. 31, 1853. During this year the Lord was pleased to give me £638,
11s. 8½d.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THREE YEARS OF PROSPERITY.

1854-1857.

    THE SITE SELECTED--SIX THOUSAND ORPHANS IN PRISON--HOW TO ASK
    FOR DAILY BREAD--REVIEW OF TWENTY-FOUR YEARS--"TAKE NO THOUGHT
    FOR THE MORROW"--INSURANCE AGAINST BAD DEBTS.


    During the year ending May 26, 1855, Mr. M. received toward the
    erection of the second new Orphan House five thousand two
    hundred and forty-two pounds eighteen shillings threepence, and
    the whole sum on hand for this object amounted to twenty-three
    thousand and fifty-nine pounds seventeen shillings eightpence
    one farthing. After recording the amount thus obtained, he adds:--

I judged that, though I had not such an amount of means in hand as I
considered necessary before being warranted to begin to build, yet that
I might make inquiries respecting land. Accordingly, I applied in the
beginning of February for the purchase of two fields which join the land
on which the new Orphan House is built. On these two fields I had had my
eye for years, and had purposed to endeavor to purchase them whenever I
might be in such a position, as to means for the building fund, that it
would be suitable to do so. I found, however, that, according to the
will of the late owner of these fields, they could not be sold _now_.
Thus my prospects were blighted. When I obtained this information,
though _naturally_ tried by it and disappointed, I said; by _God's
grace_, to myself, "The Lord has something better to give me, instead of
these two fields;" and thus my heart was kept in peace. But when now the
matter was fully decided that I could not obtain those fields, which had
appeared to me so desirable for the object, the question arose, what I
was to do for the obtaining of land. Under these circumstances some of
my Christian friends again asked, as they had done before, why I did not
build on the ground which we have around the new Orphan House. My reply
was, as before, that it could not be done: 1. Because it would throw the
new Orphan House for nearly two years into disorder, on account of the
building going on round about it. 2. There would not be sufficient room
without shutting in the present house to a great extent. 3. That, as the
new Orphan House stands in the centre of our ground, there would not be
sufficient room on any of the sides for the erection of a building so
large as would be required. I was, however, led to consider whether
there was any way whereby we could accomplish the building on the ground
belonging to the new Orphan House. In doing so, I found that,--1. By
having a high temporary boundary made of old boards, the building ground
could be entirely distinct from the present establishment. 2. By
building on an entirely different plan from that of the present house,
we should not only have room enough; but that, also, 3. The present
house would not be so inclosed that the health of the inmates of the
establishment would thereby be injured.

But there was in connection with this another point which now came under
consideration in addition to the particulars already mentioned: it was
this. Though for four years past I had never had a doubt as to its being
the will of God that I should build accommodation for seven hundred more
orphans; yet, at the same time, I had for a long time seen the
desirableness of having two houses instead of one, for the seven hundred
orphans. This previously formed judgment of having two houses for three
hundred and fifty orphans in each, or four hundred in the one, and three
hundred in the other, led me now to see whether there could be another
house built on each side of the present new Orphan House; and I judged,
from measuring the ground, that there was no objection to this plan. I
then called in the aid of architects, to survey the ground, and to make
a rough plan of two houses, one on each side, and it was found that it
could be accomplished. Having arrived thus far, I soon saw that we
should not only save expense by this plan in various ways, but
especially that thus the direction and inspection of the whole
establishment would be much more easy and simple, as the buildings would
be so near together. This, indeed, on being further considered, soon
appeared to be a matter of such importance, that if even land could be
had but a quarter of a mile off, the difficulties would be greatly
increased thereby. At the same time I found that we still should retain
so much land for cultivation by the spade as would furnish some out-door
employment for many boys, and would produce such kind of vegetables as
are the most important for young children to be had fresh out of the
ground; or that we could easily _rent_ a piece of ground near for that
purpose, though it could not be _bought_.

The result, then, to which I have arrived at present is this: that
having seen what could be accomplished on the ground which we have
already, I decided to build, without any further delay than was
necessary for preparing the plans, at the south side of the new Orphan
House, another house for four hundred children. The plans are now
ready, and in a very short time, God willing, _i. e._ as soon as all the
necessary preliminary arrangements can be made, the building will
commence, which I think will be in the early part of July of the present
year (_i. e._ 1855).

This house is intended for four hundred female orphans, bereaved of both
parents, from their _earliest_ days until they can be placed out in
service. With regard to the other house for three hundred orphans, to be
built at the north side of the new Orphan House, nothing definitely can
be stated at present. There is enough money in hand to build, fit up,
and furnish the house for four hundred orphans, and it is expected that
something will be left; but there is not sufficient money in hand, at
present, to warrant the commencement of the building of both. As soon,
however, as there is, I shall be delighted to take active measures with
regard to that for three hundred orphans also. I do not ask persons to
help me with their means. I speak to the Lord about my need in prayer,
and I do not wait upon him in vain. At the same time I feel it right to
state that there is a loud and an abundant call for caring for destitute
orphans. On May 26, 1854, I had six hundred and two waiting for
admission, each bereaved of both parents by death. Since then one
hundred and ninety-seven more have been applied for, making in all seven
hundred and ninety-nine. Of these I have been able to receive only
thirty-nine during the past year, and forty-five who were waiting for
admission have been otherwise provided for, or have died since
application was made for them; so that still seven hundred and fifteen
orphans are waiting for admission, from three months old and upward. But
this number, I state unhesitatingly, would be much larger, had not very
many persons refrained from making application because they judged it
would be of no use, as there are already so many waiting for admission.
Indeed, there is every reason to believe that there are many tens of
thousands of destitute orphans in this country. And what provision is
there in the way of orphan establishments it may be asked. At the last
census, in 1851, there were in England and Wales thirty-nine orphan
establishments, and the total number of orphans, provided for through
them, amounted only to three thousand seven hundred and sixty-four; but
at the time the new Orphan House was being built there were about six
thousand young orphans in the prisons of England. To prevent their going
to prison, to prevent their being brought up in sin and vice, yea, to be
the honored instrument to win their souls for God, I desire, by his
help, to enlarge the present establishment so as to be able to receive
one thousand orphans; and individuals who have purposed not to live for
time but for eternity, and to look on their means as in the light of
eternity, will thus have an opportunity of helping me to care for these
children. It is a great honor to be allowed to do anything for the Lord;
therefore I do not press this matter. We can only give to him of his
own; for all we have is his. When the day of recompense comes, the
regret will only be that we have done so little for him, not that we
have done too much.

    During the year from May, 1854, to May, 1855, ample means were
    provided, in answer to prayer only, for the maintenance of the
    orphans, and for the various purposes of the Scriptural
    Knowledge Institution. The following statement exhibits the
    results of Mr. Müller's labors during the year under  review:--

During this year four day schools in Bristol, with 184 children in them,
were _entirely supported_ by the funds of the Institution; and several
other day schools in Devonshire, Cornwall, Suffolk, Ireland, and
Scotland, were _assisted_ with copies of the Holy Scriptures. Further,
one Sunday school in Bristol, with 158 children, was _entirely
supported_, and seven others in Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersetshire, and
Gloucestershire, with about 400 children in them, were _assisted_.
Lastly, one adult school, with 133 adults was entirely supported during
this year. The amount expended during this year, on these various
schools, was £338, 2s. 5d.

In connection with all these various schools, I would suggest the
following important matter for prayer. From March, 1834, to May 26,
1855, there were 5,956 children in the day schools. In the adult schools
there were 2,459 persons. The number of the Sunday-school children
amounted to 2,817. Thus, without reckoning the orphans, 11,232 souls
were brought under _habitual_ instruction in the things of God in these
various schools; besides the many thousands in the schools in various
parts of England, Ireland, Scotland, British Guiana, the West Indies,
the East Indies, etc., which were to a greater or less degree assisted.

The total sum which was expended during the twenty-one years, from March
5, 1834, to May 26, 1855, in connection with the schools, which were
either entirely or in part supported by the funds of this Institution,
amounted to £7,204, 12s. 8¼d.

The number of Bibles, New Testaments, and portions of the Holy
Scriptures, which were circulated from May 26, 1854, to May 26, 1855, is
as follows:--

Bibles sold, 693. Bibles given away, 890. Testaments sold, 950.
Testaments given away, 748. Copies of the Psalms sold, 82. Other small
portions of the Holy Scriptures sold, 136.

There were circulated from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1855, through the
medium of this Institution, 13,949 Bibles, 9,047 New Testaments, 188
copies of the Psalms, and 789 other small portions of the Holy
Scriptures.

The total amount of the funds of this Institution spent on the
circulation of the Holy Scriptures, from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1855,
is £3,389, 10s. 1d. The amount spent during this year, £476, 12s. 3d.

During this year there was spent of the funds of the Institution, for
missionary objects, the sum of £2,081, 3s. 2d. By this sum fifty-seven
laborers in the word and doctrine, in various parts of the world, were
to a greater or less degree assisted.

The total amount of the funds of the Institution spent on missionary
operations, from March 5, 1834, to May 26, 1855, was £16,115, 0s. 5½d.

There was laid out for tracts, from May 26, 1854, to May 26, 1855, the
sum of £624, 8s. 4d.; and there were circulated within this year 895,034
tracts and books.

The total number of all the tracts and books which were circulated from
the beginning up to May 26, 1855, was 3,584,710.

The total amount of means expended on this object, from Nov. 19, 1840,
to May 26, 1855, was £2,868, 15s. 6¾d.

At the commencement of this period there were 298 orphans in the new
Orphan House on Ashley Down, Bristol. During the year there were
admitted into it 39 orphans.

The expenses for the orphans during this year were £4,304, 4s. 7½d.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything_ by me,
the sum of £74,132, 6s. 10¾d. was given to me for the orphans, _as
the result of prayer to God_, from the commencement of the work up to
May 26, 1855, which sum includes the £15,055, 3s. 2¼d., which was the
cost of the building, fitting up and furnishing of the present new
Orphan House, and the £23,059, 17s. 8¼d., which was in hand on the
26th May, 1855, for the building fund, and the £116, 17s. 8½d., the
balance for the current expenses. It may also be interesting to the
reader to know that the total sum which was given for the other objects,
from the commencement of the work up to May 26, 1855, amounted to
£25,239, 8s. 10¾d.; and that which came in by the sale of Bibles and
tracts, and by the payments of the children in the day schools, from the
commencement, amounted to £4,531, 12s. 10¾d. Besides this also a
great variety and number of articles of clothing, furniture, provisions,
etc., were given _for the use_ of the orphans.

I have the joy of being able to state that we have great cause for
thankfulness in that in the midst of many difficulties our labors among
the orphans continue to be blessed, and that especially again and again
instances now come before us in which those who were formerly under our
care declare themselves on the Lord's side.

Besides being able to meet the expenses for the orphans and the other
objects, amounting altogether to £7,832, 7s. 0½d., during this year I
was able to add to the building fund £5,242, 18s. 3d. The total income
during the year was £13,054, 14s. 4d.

Dec. 31, 1854. During this year there have been received into
fellowship 61.

The Lord has been pleased to give me during this year £697, 11s. 5d.

One or the other of my readers may be ready to exclaim, six hundred and
ninety-seven pounds eleven shillings fivepence! What a large sum! Not
one out of a hundred ministers has such a large salary, nor one out of
twenty clergymen such a good living! Should you, esteemed reader, say
so, my reply is: Indeed, mine is a happy way for the obtaining of my
temporal supplies; but if any one desires to go this way, he must,--

1. Not _merely say_ that he trusts in God, but must _really do so_.
Often individuals profess to trust in God, but they embrace every
opportunity where they may directly or indirectly be able to expose
their need, and thus seek to induce persons to help them. I do not say
it is wrong to make known our wants; but I do say it ill agrees with
trust in God to expose our wants for the sake of inducing persons to
help us. God will take us at our word. If we say we trust in him, he
will try whether we _really_ do so, or only _profess_ to do so; and if
_indeed_ we trust in him, we are satisfied to stand with him alone.

2. The individual who desires to go this way must be willing to be rich
or poor, as the Lord pleases. He must be willing to know what it is to
have an abundance or scarcely anything. He must be willing to leave this
world without any possessions.

3. He must be willing to take the money in God's way, not merely in
large sums, but in small. Again and again have I had a single shilling
given or sent to me. To have refused such tokens of Christian love would
have been ungracious.

4. He must be willing to live as the Lord's steward. If any one were to
begin this way of living, and did not communicate out of that which the
Lord gives to him, but hoard it up, or if he would live up to his
income, as it is called, then the Lord, who influences the hearts of his
children to help him with means, would soon cause those channels to be
dried up. How it came that my already good income still more increased
so as to come to what it is, I have stated in the early part of this
volume; it was when I determined that, by God's help, _his_ poor and
_his_ work should more than ever partake of my means. From that time
the Lord was pleased more and more to intrust me with means for my own
purse.

Various reasons might have kept me from publishing these accounts; but I
have for my object in writing the glory of God, and therefore I delight
in thus showing what a loving Master I serve, and how bountifully he
supplies my necessities; and I write for the comfort and encouragement
of my fellow-believers, that they may be led to trust in God more and
more, and therefore I feel it due to them to state how, even with regard
to this life, I am amply provided for, though that is not what I seek
after.

Up to May 26, 1856, the total income for the building fund was £29,297,
18s. 11½d., so that only about £5,700 more will be required, as far
as I am able to see, in order to accomplish to the full my purpose
respecting the accommodation for 700 more orphans.

    During the year 1855-1856, the wants of the orphans, as well as
    the demands of the missionary, Bible, tract, and school work,
    were supplied more amply than ever before, and a blessing rested
    upon all these departments of labor, as will appear from the
    following  statement:--

During this year four day schools, with 203 children, were _entirely
supported_ by the funds of the Institution; and nine day schools were
assisted with copies of the Holy Scriptures. Further, one Sunday school,
with 158 children, was _entirely supported_, and eight others were
_assisted_. Lastly, one adult school, with 158 adult scholars, was
_entirely supported_, and two other adult schools, in Kent and Norfolk,
were _assisted_ with books. The amount which was spent during this year,
in connection with these schools, was £348, 5s. 11¼d.; and the sum
total expended during the last twenty-two years, in connection with the
schools which were either entirely or in part supported by the funds of
this Institution, amounts to £7,552, 18s. 7½d. The number of all the
children who were under our care, merely in the schools which were
_entirely_ supported by this Institution, from March 5, 1834, to May 26,
1856, was 6,104 in the day schools, 2,911 in the Sunday schools, and
2,611 persons in the adult school. Thus, without reckoning the orphans,
11,626 have been brought under habitual instruction in the things of God
in these various schools; besides the many thousands in the schools in
various parts of England, Ireland, Scotland, British Guiana, the East
Indies, etc., which have been to a greater or less degree assisted.

During this year was expended on the circulation of the Holy Scriptures,
of the funds of this Institution, £496; 10s. There were circulated
during this year 2,175 Bibles, 1,233 New Testaments, 119 copies of the
Psalms, and 155 other small portions of the Holy Scriptures. There have
been circulated since March 5, 1834, through the medium of this
Institution, 16,124 Bibles, 10,280 New Testaments, 307 copies of the
Psalms, and 944 other small portions of the Holy Scriptures. The sum
total spent on the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, since March 5,
1834, is £3,886, 0s. 1d.

During this year there was spent, of the funds of the Institution, for
missionary objects, £2,501, 9s. 1d. By this sum sixty-one laborers in
the word and doctrine, in various parts of the world, were to a greater
or less degree assisted.

The sum total which has been expended on missionary operations, of the
funds of the Institution, since March 5, 1834, is £18,616, 9s. 6½d.

There was laid out for the circulation of tracts, from May 26, 1855, to
May 26, 1856, the sum of £791, 1s. 0½d., and there were circulated
812,970 tracts and books. The sum total which has been expended on this
object since Nov. 19, 1840, amounts to £3,659, 16s. 7¼d. The total
number of all the tracts and books which have been circulated since Nov.
19, 1840, is 4,397,680.

At the beginning of this period there were 297 orphans in the new Orphan
House. During the past year there have been admitted into it 25 orphans.
The total number of orphans who have been under our care since April,
1836, is 622.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything by me_,
the sum of £84,441, 6s. 3¼d. has been given to me for the orphans,
_as the result of prayer to God_, since the commencement of the work,
which sum includes the £15,055, 3s. 2¼d. which was the cost of the
building, fitting up, and furnishing of the present new Orphan House,
and the £29,297, 18s. 11½d. received up to May 26, 1856, for the
building fund, and the £167, 18s. 11¾d., the balance of the current
expenses. The total sum which has been given for the other objects since
the commencement of the work amounts to £28,904, 11s. 3¾d.; and that
which has come in by the sale of Bibles and tracts, and by the payments
of the children in the day schools, from the commencement up to May 26,
1856, amounts to £5,145, 17s.

Dec. 31, 1855. During this year the Lord has been pleased to give me
£726, 16s. 2¼d.

May 26, 1856. Yesterday evening it was twenty-four years since I came to
labor in Bristol. In looking back upon this period, as it regards the
Lord's goodness to my family and myself, the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution, and the saints among whom I seek to serve him, I exclaim,
What has God wrought! I marvel at his kindness, and yet I do not; for
such is his manner; and, if it please him that I remain longer on
earth, I expect, not fewer manifestations of his love, but more and
more.

Since my beloved friend and fellow-laborer and I first came to Bristol,
1,586 believers have been received into fellowship, which number, with
the 68 we found in communion, makes 1,654. But out of that number 252
have fallen asleep, 53 have been separated from fellowship, 145 have
left us, some, however, merely through circumstances and in love, and
510 have left Bristol; so that there are only 694 remaining in
communion.

    By the contributions received during the year 1856-7, the whole
    amount on hand for the new buildings was raised to thirty-one
    thousand eight hundred seventeen pounds one shilling and
    elevenpence. For the Bible, tract, and missionary work, and for
    schools, Mr. M. had the pleasure of receiving and of expending
    eight hundred and twenty-nine pounds more than in the previous
    year. For the support of the orphans all means were so
    abundantly provided that at the end of the year there was on
    hand a balance of one thousand four hundred and eighty-nine
    pounds.

    The following incident illustrates the author's reliance upon
    God for his own future support.

On Oct. 12, 1856, was sent to me a check for one hundred pounds, with
the request of the donor to receive this for myself, as the beginning of
raising a fund for my support when advanced in years, and for that of my
family. This very kind and well-intended proposal by the donor, who
since has died, appeared to me as a subtle temptation laid for me,
though far from being intended so by him, to depart from the principles
on which I had been acting for twenty-six years previously, both
regarding myself and the orphan work. I give the account of this
circumstance fully, as it may be profitable to one or other of the
readers.

                                          * * * * OCT. 11, 1856.

    DEAR SIR:--

    In admiration of the services which you have rendered to poor
    orphans and mankind in general, I think it right that some
    provision should be made for yourself. I think it right to send
    you one hundred pounds, as a beginning to form a fund, which I
    hope many good Christians will add to, * * * * for the
    maintenance of you and your family, if your own labors should be
    unequal to it, and I hope you will lay out this as a beginning
    accordingly. May God bless you and your labors, as he has
    hitherto done everything connected with your Institutions.

          I am, dear Sir,
                          * * * *

By God's grace I had not a moment's hesitation as to what to do. While I
most fully appreciated the great kindness of the donor, I looked upon
this as being permitted by God as a temptation to put my trust in
something else than himself, and I therefore sent the following letter
in reply:--

                                          BRISTOL, OCT. 12, 1856.

    MY DEAR SIR:--

    I hasten to thank you for your kind communication, and to inform
    you that your check for one hundred pounds has safely come to
    hand.

    I have no property whatever, nor has my dear wife; nor have I
    had one single shilling regular salary as minister of the gospel
    for the last twenty-six years, nor as the director of the Orphan
    House and the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge
    Institution for Home and Abroad. When I am in need of anything,
    I fall on my knees, and ask God that he would be pleased to give
    me what I need; and he puts it into the heart of some one or
    other to help me. Thus all my wants have been amply supplied
    during the last twenty-six years, and I can say, to the praise
    of God, I have lacked nothing. My dear wife and my only child, a
    daughter of twenty-four years, are of the same mind with me. Of
    this blessed way of living none of us are tired, but become day
    by day more convinced of its blessedness.

    I have never thought it right to make provision for myself, or
    my dear wife and daughter, except in this way, that when I saw a
    case of need, such as an aged widow, or a sick person, or a
    helpless infant, I would use my means freely which God had given
    me, fully believing that if either myself, or my dear wife or
    daughter, at some time or other, should be in need of anything,
    God would richly repay what was given to the poor, considering
    it as lent to himself.

    Under these circumstances, I am unable to accept your kindness
    of the gift of one hundred pounds _towards making a provision
    for myself and family_; for so I understand your letter. Any
    gift given to me, unasked for, by those who have it in their
    heart to help me to supply my personal and family expenses, I
    thankfully accept; or any donation given to me for the work of
    God in which I am engaged, I also thankfully accept, as a
    steward for the orphans, etc.; but your kind gift seems to me
    especially given to _make a provision for myself_, which I think
    would be displeasing to my heavenly Father, who has so
    bountifully given me my daily bread hitherto. But should I have
    misunderstood the meaning of your letter, be pleased to let me
    know it. I hold the check till I hear again from you.

    In the mean time, my dear sir, however you meant your letter, I
    am deeply sensible of your kindness, and daily pray that God
    would be pleased richly to recompense you for it, both
    temporally and spiritually.

          I am, dear Sir,
            Yours very gratefully,
                          GEORGE MÜLLER.

Two days after I received a reply, in which the donor desired me to use
the one hundred pounds for the support of the orphans, for which object
I gladly accepted this sum. The day after that I received another one
hundred pounds from the same donor, and four days after that one
hundred pounds more, all for the support of the orphans, and all from an
individual whom I have never seen.

    In the following words is contained a useful lesson to persons
    engaged in  business:--

Feb. 24, 1857. Received five pounds as a thank-offering to the Lord for
preservation from making bad debts the past year. Has it ever occurred
to the reader that the Lord only can preserve any one engaged in
business from making bad debts? Has it also occurred to the reader that
often the Lord is obliged, because we do not use for him, as good
stewards, that with which he has been pleased to intrust us, to allow
bad debts to be made? Consider these things, dear Christian reader, you
who are engaged in business. If you were engaged in mercantile affairs,
connected with hundreds of thousands of pounds, you may by the help of
God, be preserved year after year from making bad debts, though several
millions of pounds should be turned in the course of a few years,
provided you keep before you that you are the Lord's steward, and carry
on business for him; whilst, on the other hand, thousands of pounds may
be lost in one single year, out of only a comparatively small business,
because he who carries it on "withholds more than is meet, and therefore
it tends to poverty," the Lord being obliged by bad debts (as they are
called), which he uses as one of his rods, to deprive his servants of
that which was not used aright.

    The review of the year ending May, 1857, presents us with the
    following  results:--

There have been during this period four day schools _entirely supported_
by the funds of this Institution. There are at present in these four day
schools 181 children.

In addition to the entire support of these four day schools, six schools
were assisted with money, or books, or copies of the Holy Scriptures, or
both money and books.

There was one Sunday school, in which there were 175 children, _entirely
supported_ by the funds of this Institution; and six others were
_assisted_.

There has been, since the formation of the Institution, one adult school
connected with it, the expenses of which have been _entirely_ borne by
the Institution, and in which, since March 5, 1834, altogether 2,699
adults have been instructed. The number at present on the books is 72.

There were also two other adult schools _assisted_ during the past year.

The total amount of means which has been expended during the last
twenty-three years in connection with the schools, which have been
either entirely or in part supported by the funds of this Institution,
amounts to £7,938, 13s. 4d.

The number of Bibles, Testaments, and portions of the Holy Scriptures,
which have been circulated since May 26, 1856, is as follows:--

Bibles sold, 601. Bibles given away, 1,476. Testaments sold, 829.
Testaments given away, 393. Copies of the Psalms sold, 151. Other small
portions of the Holy Scriptures sold, 316.

There have been circulated since March 5, 1834, through the medium of
this Institution, 18,201 Bibles, 11,502 Testaments, 458 copies of the
Psalms, and 1,260 other small portions of the Holy Scriptures.

The total amount of the funds of this Institution spent on the
circulation of the Holy Scriptures, since March 5, 1834, is £4,407, 7s.
2½d. The amount spent during the past year, £521, 7s. 1½d.

Some time since a brother in the Lord wrote to me that he had it in his
heart to visit from house to house, in a large manufacturing town in
Yorkshire, and, if possible, to supply each house with a tract, and to
seek out persons who were destitute of copies of the Holy Scriptures. I
supplied him, therefore, with 10,000 gospel tracts and 30 Bibles, and
subsequently with 127 more Bibles, and finally with 10,000 more tracts
and 74 Bibles.

The third object of this Institution is, to aid missionary efforts.

During the past year has been spent of the funds of the Institution for
this object, the sum of £3,177, 17s. 11½d. By this sum seventy-four
laborers in the word and doctrine, in various parts of the world, have
been to a greater or less degree assisted.

The year before last, I had been enabled to spend on this part of the
work more than during any previous year; but the last year I was, by
God's help, enabled not only to disburse for this object as much as
during the previous year, but £676, 8s. 10½d. more. For this
privilege I feel grateful; yet I long to be permitted by the Lord to do
much more still. But whilst it has been a source of joy to me to be able
to assist seventy-four servants of Christ in many parts of the world,
that which was far more than this a cause of thankfulness, was, that
almost week by week, and often repeatedly in the same week, I had
refreshing intelligence from the brethren whom I sought to help.

    The letters of these brethren exhibit the fact that the aid
    conveyed through Mr. M. was most timely, coming often in the
    hour of sore need. They also give assurance that their labors
    had been singularly blessed to the conversion of the heathen,
    and of the ignorant and deluded among whom they preached.

The total amount of the funds of the Institution which has been spent
on missionary operations, since March 5, 1834, is £21,794, 7s. 6d.

There has been laid out for tracts, from May 26, 1856, to May 26, 1857,
the sum of £975, 18s. 7½d.; and there have been circulated within the
last year 1,313,301 tracts and books. The sum total which has been
expended on this object, since Nov. 19, 1840, amounts to £4,635, 15s.
2¾d.

The total number of all the tracts and books which have been circulated
since Nov. 19, 1840, is 5,710,981.

    Letters from those to whom tracts were sent for distribution,
    convey the intelligence that in very many instances the tracts
    were blessed to the conversion of sinners.

At the commencement of the last period there were 299 orphans in the new
Orphan House on Ashley Down, Bristol. During the past year there were
admitted into it 30 orphans, making 329 in all. When the last Report was
published, there were 847 orphans waiting for admission. Since then 231
more destitute orphans, bereaved of both parents by death, and some only
a few weeks old, have been applied for to be admitted, making 1,078 in
all. Of these 1,078 we were only able to receive 30, as has been stated,
and 58 either died or were otherwise provided for, as their relatives or
friends have informed us, so that there are still 990 waiting for
admission. Christian reader, think of these 990 destitute orphans,
bereaved of both parents! I have now, however, before me the most
pleasant prospect, if the Lord permit, of being able to receive 400 of
them in about three months, and also of being permitted to build the
third house for 300 more.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything_ by me,
the sum of £92,175, 4s. 2½d. has been given to me for the orphans,
_as the result of prayer to God_, since the commencement of the work,
which sum includes the £15,055, 3s. 2¼d. which was the cost of the
building, fitting up, and furnishing of the present new Orphan House,
and the £31,817, 1s. 11d., which had been received up to May 26, 1857,
for the building fund, and the £1,489, 7s. 9d., the balance of the
current expenses. It may also be interesting to the reader to know that
the total amount which has been given for the other objects, since the
commencement of the work, amounts to £33,293, 9s. 10¼d.; and that
which has come in by the sale of Bibles, since the commencement, amounts
to £2,080, 9s. 10½d.; by sale of tracts, £1,778, 2s. 5d.; and by the
payments of the children in the day schools, from the commencement,
£2,066, 13s. 4½d.

The Lord is pleased to continue to allow us to see fruit in connection
with the orphan work, with reference to those who are _now_ under our
care, and we hear still again and again of cases in which those who were
_formerly_ under our care, have been led to declare themselves openly
for the Lord, besides those in whom we saw the work of grace manifestly
begun before they left the Orphan House.




CHAPTER XXIV.

CONCLUSION.

1857-1860.

    THE HOUSE FOR FOUR HUNDRED OPENED--PRAYER MORE THAN
    ANSWERED--THE RESORT IN TROUBLE--AN OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT ON
    THE ORPHANS--LAND FOR A NEW BUILDING PURCHASED--"BUT ONE LIFE TO
    SPEND FOR GOD"--"SCATTERING, YET INCREASING"--A MEMORABLE
    YEAR--THE GERM OF THE IRISH REVIVAL--LETTER FROM AN ORPHAN--THE
    FRUIT OF SIX MONTHS' PRAYER--THE RESULTS OF THE WORK--REVIVAL
    AMONG THE ORPHANS.


    Under date of Nov. 12, 1857, Mr. M.  writes:--

The long looked-for and long prayed-for day had now arrived when the
desire of my heart was granted to me, to be able to open the house for
four hundred additional orphans. Much had I labored in prayer and active
engagements to accomplish what was to be done previously; and now things
were so far advanced as that the new house was ready for use; and a few
days after we began to receive the children into it. How precious this
was to me, such will be able to enter into, who, having day by day
prayed for a blessing for seven years, and often repeatedly on the same
day, at last obtain the desire of their heart. Yet this blessing came
not unexpectedly to me, but had been looked for, and had, in the full
assurance of faith, been expected to be obtained in God's own time.

Feb. 17, 1858. As far as I am able to judge, I have now all I require in
the way of pecuniary means for the third house also, so that I am able
to accomplish the full enlargement of the orphan work to one thousand
orphans.

    By the conclusion of the year under consideration, Mr. M. had
    received, from all sources, thirty-five thousand three hundred
    and thirty-five pounds nine shillings threepence toward the new
    Orphan Houses, "being actually three hundred and thirty-five
    pounds nine shillings threepence more than I had been from the
    commencement praying for."

    The following circumstance, connected with the maintenance and
    care of the orphans, exhibits the reliance placed upon prayer
    and faith for relief in every  exigency:--

Towards the end of November, 1857, I was most unexpectedly informed that
the boiler of our heating apparatus at the new Orphan House, No. 1,
leaked very considerably, so that it was impossible to go through the
winter with such a leak. Our heating apparatus consists of a large
cylinder boiler, inside of which the fire is kept, and with which boiler
the water pipes which warm the rooms are connected. Hot air is also
connected with this apparatus. This now was my position. The boiler had
been considered suited for the work of the winter; the having had ground
to suspect its being worn out, and not to have done anything towards its
being replaced by a new one, and to have said I will trust in God
regarding it, would be careless presumption, but not faith in God. It
would be the counterfeit of faith.

The boiler is entirely surrounded by brickwork; its state, therefore,
could not be known without taking down the brickwork; this, if needless,
would be rather injurious to the boiler than otherwise; and as, year
after year, for eight winters, we had had no difficulty in this way, we
had not anticipated it now. But suddenly and most unexpectedly, at the
commencement of the winter, this difficulty occurred. What then was to
be done? For the children, especially the younger infants, I felt deeply
concerned that they might not suffer through want of warmth. But how
were we to obtain warmth? The introduction of a _new_ boiler would, in
all probability, take many weeks. The _repairing_ of the boiler was a
questionable matter, on account of the greatness of the leak; but, if
not, nothing could be said of it, till the brick-chamber in which the
boiler, with Hazard's patent heating apparatus, is inclosed, was, at
least in part, removed; but that would, at least as far as we could
judge, take days, and what was to be done in the mean time to find warm
rooms for three hundred children? It naturally occurred to me to
introduce temporary gas stoves, but, on further weighing the matter, it
was found that we should be unable to heat our very large rooms with gas
except we had very many stoves, which we could not introduce, as we had
not a sufficient quantity of gas to spare from our lighting apparatus.
Moreover, for each of these stoves we needed a small chimney, to carry
off the impure air. This mode of heating, therefore, though applicable
to a hall, a staircase, or a shop, would not suit our purposes. I also
thought of the temporary introduction of Arnott's stoves; but they would
be unsuitable, as we needed chimneys, long chimneys, for them, as they
would have been of a temporary kind, and therefore must go out of the
windows. On this account, the uncertainty of its answering in our case,
the disfigurement of the rooms almost permanently, led me to see it
needful to give up this plan also. But what was to be done? Gladly would
I have paid one hundred pounds if thereby the difficulty could have been
overcome, and the children not be exposed to suffer for many days from
being in cold rooms. At last I determined on falling entirely into the
hands of God, who is very merciful and of tender compassion, and I
decided on having, at all events, the brick-chamber opened, to see the
extent of the damage, and to see whether the boiler might be repaired,
so as to carry us through the winter. The day was fixed when the workmen
were to come, and all the necessary arrangements were made. The fire, of
course, had to be let out while the repairs were going on. But now see.
After the day was fixed for the repairs, a bleak north wind set in. It
began to blow either on Thursday or Friday before the Wednesday
afternoon when the fire was to be let out. Now came the first really
cold weather which we had in the beginning of last winter, during the
first days of December. What was to be done? The repairs could not be
put off. I now asked the Lord for two things, viz. that he would be
pleased to change the north wind into a south wind, and that he would
give to the workmen "a mind to work;" for I remembered how much Nehemiah
accomplished in fifty-two days, whilst building the walls of Jerusalem,
because "the people had a mind to work." Well, the memorable day came.
The evening before, the bleak north wind blew still; but on the
Wednesday the south wind blew: exactly as I had prayed. The weather was
so mild that no fire was needed. The brickwork is removed, the leak is
found out very soon, the boiler-makers begin to repair in good earnest.
About half-past eight in the evening, when I was going to leave the new
Orphan House for my home, I was informed at the lodge that the acting
principal of the firm whence the boiler-makers came was arrived, to see
how the work was going on, and whether he could in any way speed the
matter. I went immediately into the cellar, therefore, to see him with
the men, to seek to expedite the business. In speaking to the principal
of this, he said in their hearing, "the men will work late this evening,
and come very early again to-morrow." "We would rather, sir," said the
leader, "work all night." Then remembered I the second part of my
prayer, that God would give the men "a mind to work." Thus it was: by
the morning the repair of the boiler was accomplished, the leak was
stopped, though with great difficulty, and within about thirty hours the
brickwork was up again and the fire in the boiler; and all the time the
south wind blew so mildly that there was not the least need of a fire.

Here, then, is one of our difficulties which was overcome by prayer and
faith.

For nearly three months all went on well; but at the end of February
another leak appeared, which was worse than the previous one. But over
this also we were helped through prayer, so that without any real
inconvenience the repairs were accomplished within about thirty hours.
From that time the Lord has not tried us any further in this way. While
I am writing this it is fine warm weather, and I have ordered in both
houses the fires to be discontinued in the heating apparatuses, and, the
Lord willing, a new boiler will of course be substituted.

Feb. 2, 1858. "From Newton" one pound. To-day I took the first active
steps towards the building of the third house, when immediately
afterwards I was informed by letter that a lady in London, an entire
stranger to me, had ordered her bankers to send me three hundred pounds
for the support of the orphans. I was also further informed in the
evening that in two weeks eight hundred pounds shall be paid to me for
the work of the Lord. The three hundred pounds was sent the next day,
and the eight hundred pounds a fortnight after. See how, with
enlargement of the work, the Lord keeps pace with the expenses, helping
when help is really needed, often also giving beforehand.

    During the year 1857-8, twenty-four schools were supported or
    assisted out of the funds of the Institution, three thousand
    nine hundred and sixty-three Bibles and portions of Scripture
    were circulated, and three thousand five hundred and thirty-one
    pounds expended for the aid of eighty-two laborers in various
    parts of the world. From these men Mr. Müller received letters
    containing the delightful intelligence that their labor had been
    blessed of the Lord. After giving copious extracts from these
    letters, Mr. M. adds:--

Such extracts might be greatly multiplied, and, as I said before, a
large volume might easily be written; but space forbids me giving any
more. I feel it, however, due to the Christian reader to state that
there is good reason to believe that many hundreds of souls have been
brought to the knowledge of the Lord through the instrumentality of
these brethren within the last year; and may we not hope that even that
which is known is not nearly all that the Lord has been pleased to
accomplish through them? How seasonably, often, the help for which I had
labored in prayer has come to these dear servants of Christ, the
following extracts from letters may show, though hundreds of similar
letters have been received by me within the last twenty years.

May 19, 1858. "I gratefully acknowledge the Lord's goodness in the
receipt of your check for ten pounds. Being brought low, my dear wife
and myself, when specially waiting on him last evening, pleaded with the
Lord that he would graciously send a supply this morning; and again we
have the proof of his love by your letter and its contents. Bless the
Lord, O my soul! With many thanks to you, in which my dear wife unites,
I am," etc.

Feb. 27, 1858. "O, how my heart goes out towards you for your
affectionate remembrance of us in our low estate! _Not a shilling_ had
we in the house, nor any human prospect of any money, when your
remittance of five pounds reached us."

A laborer on the Continent writes on Dec. 17, 1857: "We received
yesterday your kind note inclosing eight pounds. The very day you sent
your letter to the post-office, the 12th instant, was a day set apart
for prayer, with fasting, to ask the Lord for means."

    There were also circulated during the year 1,334,791 tracts and
    books. Letters received from the persons who distributed them
    show that they were greatly blessed in awakening and converting
    souls.

At the commencement of the last period there were 299 orphans in the new
Orphan House on Ashley Down, Bristol. During the past year there were
admitted into it, and into the new house for 400, altogether 219
orphans. The total number of orphans who have been under our care since
April 11, 1836, is 871.

The opening of the new house for 400 orphans, which is not a wing of the
house that has been before in existence, but an entirely distinct
establishment, and larger than the former, has made it needful to
distinguish between these two houses in this way, that the house which
was opened on June 18, 1849, is now called the new Orphan House No. 1,
and the one which was opened on Nov. 12, 1857, is called the new Orphan
House No. 2. The new Orphan House No. 1 is fitted up for the
accommodation of 140 orphan girls above seven years of age, 80 orphan
boys above seven years, and 80 male and female orphans from their
earliest days, till they are about seven or eight years of age. The
infants, after having passed the age of seven or eight years, are
removed into the different departments for older boys and girls. The new
Orphan House No. 2 is fitted up for 200 female infant orphans, and for
200 elder female orphans.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything_ by me,
the sum of £102,714, 9s. 6d. has been given to me for the orphans, _as
the result of prayer to God_, since the commencement of the work, which
sum includes the amount received for the building fund for the houses
already built and the one to be built. It may also be interesting to the
reader to know that the total amount which has been given for the other
objects, since the commencement of the work, amounts to £38,297, 12s.
11½d.; and that which has come in by the sale of Bibles since the
commencement amounts to £2,222, 4s. 3½d.; by sale of tracts, £2,294,
6s. 11½d., and by the payments of children in the day schools, from
the commencement, £2,138, 11s. 4¼d.

During the past twenty-two years the Spirit of God has been again and
again working among the orphans who were under our care, so that very
many of them have been brought to the knowledge of the Lord; but we
never had so great a work, and at the same time one so satisfactory,
_within so short a time_, as during the past year. I will enter somewhat
into details for the benefit of the reader. There are one hundred and
forty elder girls in the new Orphan House No. 1, of whom, at the
beginning of the last period, ten were considered to be believers.

On May 26, 1857, the death of an orphan, Caroline Bailey, took place.
The death of this beloved girl, who had known the Lord several months
before she fell asleep, seems to have been used by the Lord as a means
of answering in a goodly measure our daily prayers for the conversion of
the orphans. It pleased God at the beginning of the last period mightily
to work among the orphans, so that all at once, within a few days,
without any apparent cause, except it be the peaceful end of the beloved
Caroline Bailey, more than fifty of these girls were brought to be under
concern about their souls, and some with deep conviction of sin
accompanying it, so that they were exceedingly distressed. And how is it
now? my readers may ask; for young persons are often apparently much
concerned about the things of God, but these impressions pass away.
True, dear reader, I have seen this myself, having had to do with many
thousands of children and young persons within the last thirty years.
Had, therefore, this work among the orphans begun within the last few
days, or even weeks, I should have passed it over in silence; but more
than a year has now elapsed since it commenced, and it will, therefore,
give joy to the godly reader to hear that in addition to those ten who
were previously believers, and of whom one has been sent to service,
there are twenty-three girls respecting whom for several months there
has been no doubt as to their being believers; two died in the faith
within the year; and there are thirty-eight more who are awakened and
under concern about their souls, but respecting whom we cannot speak as
yet so decidedly. All this regards only one branch of the Orphan
Establishment, the elder girls of the House No. 1. In addition to this,
I am glad also to be able to state that among the other girls in the New
House No. 2, and among the boys also, some are interested about the
things of God; yea, our labors begin already to be blessed to the
hearts of some of the new received orphans.

    Continuing the narrative of the progress of the new Orphan
    Houses, Mr. M. writes under date of Oct. 29, 1858:--

In the last Report I stated that I was looking out for land for the
third house. Regarding this, I waited day by day upon God. But for many
months it pleased him to exercise my faith and patience. When, more than
once I seemed to have obtained my desire, I again appeared further from
it than ever. However, I continued to pray and to exercise faith, being
fully assured that the Lord's time was not yet come, and that, when it
was, he would help. And so it proved. At last, in September, 1858, I
obtained eleven and a half acres of land, quite close to the new Orphan
Houses No. 1 and No. 2, and only separated from them by the road. On
these eleven and a half acres of land a house is built. The price for
house and land was three thousand six hundred and thirty-one pounds
fifteen shillings, being more money than I should have seen it right to
expend on the site, had it not been of the utmost importance that the
third house should be quite near the other two, to facilitate the
superintendence and direction of the establishment. Thus, at last, this
prayer also was answered, concerning which I had been waiting upon God
for so many months, and concerning which the difficulties as to sight
and reason seemed so great, but respecting which my mind was continually
at peace; for I was sure that, as I was doing God's work, he would, in
his own time, help me in this particular also. The longer I go on in
this service, the more I find that prayer and faith can overcome every
difficulty.

Having now obtained land, and so much, my desire was to make the best
use of it, and to build for four hundred orphans, instead of for three
hundred, as I had previously purposed to do. After having had several
meetings with the architects, and finding that it was possible to
accommodate, with comparatively little more expense, four hundred and
fifty orphans, instead of four hundred, I finally determined on that
number, so as to have eventually one thousand one hundred and fifty
orphans under my care, instead of one thousand, as for several years
previously had been contemplated. The greatness of the number of
destitute children bereaved of both parents by death,--together with the
greatness of the Lord's blessing, which has during all these many years
rested upon my service in this way,--and the greatness of the Lord's
help in giving me assistants and helpers in the work as well as
means,--and, above all, the deep realization that I have but one life to
spend for God on earth, and that that one life is but a brief
life;--these were the reasons which led me to this further enlargement.
To this determination of a still further enlargement _I came solely in
dependence upon the living God for help_, though the increase of expense
for the building fund, on account of the purchase of the land, and
accommodation to be built for the additional one hundred and fifty
orphans more than had been from the beginning contemplated, would not be
less than from six thousand to seven thousand five hundred pounds _more_
than I had originally expected the total of the premises, which were to
be erected, would cost; and though, in addition to this, the yearly
additional expenditure for the maintenance of these one hundred and
fifty orphans, beyond the intended number of one thousand, could not be
less than one thousand eight hundred pounds a year. But none of these
difficulties discouraged me.

Nov. 27. It is this day a twelvemonth since we began to receive fresh
children into the new Orphan House No. 2. Since then the mercies of the
Lord have been very many, and his help has been very great. There have
been received from Nov. 27, 1857, to Nov. 27, 1858, altogether three
hundred and eight orphans. Such a year I never spent in this
service,--one so full of help and blessing in every way.

Jan. 4, 1859. Received seven thousand pounds, which was entirely left at
my disposal, as the work of God in which I am engaged might more
especially require it. When I decided at the end of October, 1858, to
build for four hundred and fifty orphans, instead of three hundred, I
needed several thousand pounds more, and was fully assured that God
would give me the required means, because in reliance upon him, and for
the honor of his name, I had determined on this enlargement; and now
see, esteemed reader, how the Lord honored this my faith in him!

Jan. 12. From Westerham, in eighty-eight small donations, £4, 8s. 6d.
Without my knowledge these eighty-eight small donations had been
contributed, and were sent to me.

May 26. During the year now closing, four thousand one hundred and
forty-nine-pounds seventeen shillings fivepence was expended in aid of
ninety-one brethren laboring in England, Scotland, Ireland, Belgium,
France, Switzerland, Sardinia, Canada, Nova Scotia, East Indies, China,
and British Guiana. Also, during the past year 1,885,401 tracts and
books have been circulated.

At the commencement of the last period there were four hundred and
ninety-nine orphans in the new Orphan Houses No. 1 and No. 2. On May 26,
1859, there were six hundred and seventy-two orphans in the two houses,
_i. e._ in No. 1, 299, and in No. 2, 373. The total number of orphans
who have been under our care since April 11, 1836, is 1,083.

Though during the past year we have not had so great and so sudden a
work of the Spirit of God going on among the orphans as during the
previous year, when, within a few days, above fifty out of one
department of one hundred and forty girls were suddenly brought under
deep concern about their souls; yet, the blessing of the Lord has not
been withheld even spiritually. There are already many caring about the
things of God among the four hundred and twenty-four orphans who were
received within the last eighteen months, and who ask it, as a
privilege, to be allowed, in the summer, to take their Bibles with them
to bed, so that, should they awake in the morning before the bell is
rung, they may be able to read it. Out of the thirteen girls who were
sent to service, nine had been believers for some time before they left
the establishment.

When I began the orphan work, one of the especial objects which I had in
view was to benefit the church of Christ at large, by the accounts which
I might be enabled to write in connection with this service; for I
expected, from the beginning, to have many answers to prayer granted to
me, and I confidently anticipated that the recording of them would be
beneficial to believers, in leading them to look for answers to their
own prayers, and in encouraging them to bring all their own necessities
before God in prayer. I likewise firmly believed that many unconverted
persons would, by means of such writings, be led to see the reality of
the things of God. As I expected, so it has been. In very many instances
the reading of the Reports of this Institution, or the "Narrative of the
Lord's Dealings" with me, has been blessed by God to the conversion of
those who knew not our Lord Jesus. In thousands of instances, likewise,
believers have been benefited through them, being thereby comforted,
encouraged, led more simply to the Holy Scriptures, led more fully to
trust in God for everything; in a word, led, in a greater or less
degree, to walk in the same path of faith in which the writer, by the
help of God, is walking. The thousands of instances of blessing which
have been brought before me during the past twenty-four years (for
almost daily I have heard of fresh cases, and often of several on the
same day), have only still further led me to earnestness in prayer, that
the Lord would condescend to use these publications still more, and make
them a blessing to many tens of thousands of his children, and to many
tens of thousands of the unconverted. And now the reader will rejoice
with me, when he reads what follows. I am the more led to relate the
following, that the godly reader more than ever may be encouraged to
prayer, and, also, that an _accurate_ statement may be given of this
fact, which has been already referred to in many public places in
connection with revival-meetings, and which likewise has been several
times stated in print.

In November, 1856, a young Irishman, Mr. James McQuilkin, was brought to
the knowledge of the Lord. Soon after his conversion he saw my Narrative
advertised. He had a great desire to read it, and procured it
accordingly, about January, 1857. God blessed it greatly to his soul,
especially in showing to him what could be obtained by prayer. He said
to himself something like this: See what Mr. Müller obtains simply by
prayer. Thus _I_ may obtain blessing by prayer. He now set himself to
pray that the Lord would give him a spiritual companion, one who knew
the Lord. Soon after, he became acquainted with a young man who knew the
Lord. These two began a prayer meeting in one of the Sunday schools in
the parish of Connor. Having his prayer answered in obtaining a
spiritual companion, Mr. James McQuilkin asked the Lord to lead him to
become acquainted with some more of his hidden ones. Soon after, the
Lord gave him two more young men, who knew the Lord previously, as far
as he could judge. In autumn, 1857, Mr. James McQuilkin stated to these
three young men, given him in answer to believing prayer, what blessing
he had derived from my Narrative,--how it had led him to see the power
of believing prayer; and he proposed that they should meet for prayer,
to seek the Lord's blessing upon their various labors in the Sunday
schools, prayer meetings, and preachings of the gospel. Accordingly, in
autumn, 1857, these four young men met together for prayer in a small
schoolhouse near the village of Kells, in the parish of Connor, every
Friday evening. On January 1, 1858, the Lord gave them the first
remarkable answer to prayer in the conversion of a farm servant. He was
taken into the number, and thus there were five who gave themselves to
prayer. Shortly after, another young man, about twenty years old, was
converted; there were now six. This greatly encouraged the other three
who first had met with Mr. James McQuilkin. Others now were converted,
who were also taken into the number; but only believers were admitted to
these fellowship meetings, in which they read, prayed, and offered to
each other a few thoughts from the Scriptures. These meetings, and
others for the preaching of the gospel, were held in the parish of
Connor, Antrim, Ireland. Up to this time all was going on most quietly,
though many souls were converted. There were no physical prostrations,
as afterwards. About Christmas, 1858, a young man from Ahoghill, who had
come to live at Connor, and who had been converted through this little
company of believers, went to see his friends at Ahoghill, and spoke to
them about their own souls and the work of God at Connor. His friends
desired to see some of these converts. Accordingly, Mr. James McQuilkin,
with two of the first who met for prayer, went, on February 2, 1859, and
held a meeting at Ahoghill in one of the Presbyterian churches. Some
believed, some mocked, and others thought there was a great deal of
presumption in these young converts; yet many wished to have another
meeting. This was held by the same three young men, on February 16,
1859; and now the Spirit of God began to work, and to work mightily.
Souls were converted, and from that time conversions multiplied rapidly.
Some of these converts went to other places, and carried the spiritual
fire, so to speak, with them. The blessed work of the Spirit of God
spread in _many places_. On April 5, 1859, Mr. James McQuilkin went to
Ballymena, held a meeting there in one of the Presbyterian churches, and
on April 11 held another meeting in another of the Presbyterian
churches. Several were convinced of sin, and the work of the Spirit of
God went forward in Ballymena. On May 28, 1859, he went to Belfast.
During the first week, there were meetings held in five different
Presbyterian churches, and from that time the blessed work commenced at
Belfast. In all these visits he was accompanied and helped by Mr.
Jeremiah Meneely, one of the three young men who first met with him
after the reading of my Narrative. From this time the work of the Holy
Ghost spread further and further; for the young converts were used by
the Lord to carry the truth from one place to another.

Such was the _beginning_ of that mighty work of the Holy Spirit, which
has led to the conversion of many tens of thousands, and which is still
going on even in Ireland, and the blessed results of which are still
felt in Scotland, England, and other countries. It is almost needless to
add, that in no degree the honor is due to the instruments, but to the
Holy Spirit alone; yet these facts are stated in order that it may be
seen what delight God has in answering abundantly the believing prayers
of his children.

Seeing, then, how greatly he has condescended to own these records
regarding his willingness to listen to prayer, made to him in the name
of the Lord Jesus, I am delighted, at the close of another year, in
connection with this Institution, to recount a few of the very many
instances in which God has been pleased to answer our prayers, and to
grant blessing to rest upon the various objects of this Institution;
yea, blessing greater far than during any part of the past twenty-six
years, while it has been in operation.

    Up to May 26, 1860, Mr. M. received for the building fund the
    sum of £45,113, 14s. 4½d.

In May, 1859, I had in hand for the Bible, school, tract, and missionary
funds, £2,009, 11s. 2½d., a balance far greater than I ever had had
before. This arose not from the fact of unwillingness to spend the means
which the Lord had been pleased to intrust me with, but chiefly from the
fact that some large donations had come in during the last part of the
previous year; and I had not, as a steward who desires to act in the
fear of God, had opportunities brought before me to spend all. But much
as the balance was, all the various schools, directly or indirectly
connected with the Institution, required means; the circulation of the
Holy Scriptures and tracts, which objects increase more and more, needed
much, in order to enter every suitable open door; and lastly, and
especially, the ninety-one preachers of the gospel in various parts of
the world, on my list on May 26, 1859, required a large sum to aid them.
All these various objects, therefore, needed so much, that the balance,
large as it was, would have lasted but a short time, had not the living
God, who has been my helper from the beginning, and to whom I have
looked, and looked alone, opened, in answer to our prayers, his
bountiful hands, and sent in more before the balance was expended; so
that, though without any human probability of meeting even one half of
the probable expenses in connection with these objects, not only have I
been able to meet the whole, but also, so bountifully has God helped,
that though the expenses were £1,584, 7s. 3¾d. more than during the
preceding year, I had not only enough, but even a larger balance was
left than at the end of the previous year.

Jan. 31, 1860. On this day I received a donation of three thousand
pounds, of which I took for these objects two thousand pounds. Day by
day, during this period also, I had been asking the Lord for means for
these objects; and day by day I had been entreating him that he would be
pleased to enable me to accomplish during this period as much as during
the former one in the way of circulating the Holy Scriptures and tracts,
and in aiding missionary operations, though I had no natural prospect
whatever of being able to do so. My eyes were alone directed to the
living God, who year after year for many years past had allowed me to
increase the operations of these three objects, notwithstanding the
continual increase of expense in connection with the orphan work; and
thus I expected, fully expected, though all appearance was against it,
that during this period also I should be again helped by God, the living
God. Think, then, Christian reader, how great my spiritual refreshment,
when, by this one donation in a great measure, I saw these my daily
prayers being again answered. In like manner may you, in your sphere of
service, in your family affairs, in your business, in your profession,
in your various temporal or spiritual necessities, have your prayers
answered.

Dec. 9, 1859. To-day it is twenty-four years since the orphan work
commenced. What has God wrought! There have been received since then
altogether 1,129 orphans, and during the last two years and two months
alone 469, so greatly has the work increased of late. We have now 700
orphans under our care.

Dec. 10. The following letter was received to-day from an apprentice:--

    MOST BELOVED SIR:

    With feelings of gratitude and great thankfulness to you for all
    the kindness I experienced whilst under your care, and for now
    apprenticing me to a suitable trade whereby I can earn my own
    living, I write you these few lines. I arrived at my destined
    abode in safety, and was kindly received by my master and
    mistress. Dear sir, I thank you for the education, food,
    clothing, and for every comfort; but, above all, for the
    instruction from God's word which I received when in that happy
    Orphan House; for it was there I was brought to know Jesus as my
    Saviour; and I hope to have him as my guide through all my
    difficulties, temptations, and trials in this world; and, having
    him for my guide, I hope to prosper in my trade, and thereby
    show my gratitude to you for all the kindness I have received.
    Please to accept my gratitude and thanks; and I hope you will be
    spared many, many more years, to care for poor destitute
    children like me. I am sure I shall often look back with
    pleasure and regret to the time I was in that happy home;--with
    pleasure that I lived there, and regret that I left it. Begging
    you to accept my grateful thanks, and with my kind love to Mr.
    L----, Mr. B----, Mr. W----, and Mr. S----,

           I am, dear sir,
             Yours gratefully,
                              * * * *

The Christian reader, I doubt not, in perusing such letters, will with
us thank God for condescending to give such blessing, such abundant
blessing, to our labors.

Feb. 14, 1860. Two pounds ten shillings sixpence, with the following
letter:--

    MY DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD JESUS CHRIST:

    Will you please to accept an order for two pounds ten shillings
    sixpence by the same post, for the dear orphans under your care?
    The history of this small sum is as follows. About seven and a
    half years ago your Narrative was put into my hands, which the
    Lord very greatly blessed to my soul. Six years and eleven
    months ago I was enabled to cast myself, my wife and family,
    upon the Lord, and look to _Him alone_ for the supply of our
    temporal necessities while laboring in his glorious cause. From
    that time to the present we have had no claims upon any person
    for a single penny; nor have we made known our wants to any, or
    applied to any person for help, but to our heavenly Father
    alone; and he has supplied our need and not suffered us to be
    confounded, blessed be his name! My dear wife, as well as
    myself, from the very first had a strong desire to help you a
    _little_ in your blessed work of love and labor of faith; but,
    for a long time, owing to the continued ill-health of my wife,
    and the growing expenses of our family, we never seemed to have
    any money to spare; so all we did was to _wish, desire_, and
    _talk about it_, and say how happy we should be if the Lord
    would enable us to do so. At length, we both felt we were acting
    wrong, and on the eighth of August last we solemnly decided we
    would give the Lord back a tenth of the money he was pleased to
    send us, though at that time we were very poor, I may add in
    deeper poverty than we had ever been before; yet, under those
    circumstances, we were enabled in the strength of the Lord to
    come to the above decision and act up to it that very morning;
    and the peace and joy we both felt it is in vain for me to
    attempt to describe. The Lord has kept us firm ever since, and
    instead of having less for our own use, we have had even more;
    so, dear sir, this sum is the fruit of six months' prayers.
    Pardon me for troubling you with so long an account of so
    trifling a sum; but I want you to bless our heavenly Father for
    his goodness to us his unworthy servants, and to remember us in
    your petitions at a throne of grace.

          I am, my dear brother,
            Yours very affectionately and respectfully,
                                                       * * * *

During the year 1859-60 there have been received for the orphans 3,542
separate sums. Of these there were 1,494 under 5s., 560 above 5s. and
not exceeding 10s., 614 above 10s. and not exceeding £1, 288 above £1
and not exceeding £2, 411 above £2 and not exceeding £5, 93 above £5 and
not exceeding £10, 49 above £10 and not exceeding £20, 10 above £20 and
under £50, 11 of £50, 1 of £59, 19s. 9d., 1 of £62, 17s., 1 of £89, 4s.,
1 of £96, 12s. 3d., 5 of £100, 2 of £500, and 1 of £1,500. Among these
donations were some from East India, Australia, Cape of Good Hope,
Saxony, Holland, South America, United States, from vessels on the
ocean, and from missionaries among the heathen.

During the year under consideration twenty-three schools in England were
supported or aided by the funds of the Institution. In all of these the
teachers are persons of piety, and instruction is given not only in
secular knowledge, but in the way of salvation. Without reckoning the
orphans, 13,124 souls have been brought under _habitual_ instruction in
the things of God in these various schools; besides the many thousands
in the schools in the various parts of England, Ireland, Scotland,
British Guiana, the West Indies, the East Indies, etc., which have been
to a greater or less degree assisted.

The total amount of means which has been expended during the last
twenty-six years in connection with the schools, which have been either
entirely or in part supported by the funds of this Institution, amounts
to £9,275, 0s. 8½d.

The number of Bibles, Testaments, and portions of the Holy Scriptures,
which have been circulated since May 26, 1859, is as follows: Bibles
sold, 579. Bibles given away, 1,120. Testaments sold, 409. Testaments
given away, 725. Copies of the Psalms sold, 63. Other small portions of
the Holy Scriptures sold, 248.

There have been circulated since March 5, 1834, through the medium of
this Institution, 24,768 Bibles, 15,100 Testaments, 719 copies of the
Psalms, and 1,876 other small portions of the Holy Scriptures.

The amount of the funds of the Institution spent during the past year on
the circulation of the Holy Scriptures is £398, 3s. 7d. The total amount
spent since March 5, 1834, is £5,681, 13s. 3½d.

During the past year has been spent of the funds of the Institution, in
aid of missionary efforts at home and abroad, the sum of £5,019, 6s. 1d.
By this sum one hundred and one laborers in the word and doctrine, in
various parts of the world, have been to a greater or less degree
assisted. It is an interesting fact that these laborers are located in
England, Scotland, Ireland, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Sardinia,
Canada, Nova Scotia, East India, China, and British Guiana.

The laborers aided by the Institution were peculiarly blessed during the
year 1859-60. While the preaching of those laboring in _foreign_ lands
was very useful, the brethren preaching in Ireland and Scotland were
signally favored with success, and were permitted to see in a wonderful
measure the fruit of their prayers and toils. A single extract only can
be given from the letter of a laborer in Scotland.

A devoted servant of Christ has been laboring in a manufacturing town in
Scotland, where, by means of schools, Bible classes, visiting from house
to house, and preaching the gospel among thousands of the most wretched,
most debased, and most ignorant, he seeks to win souls for the Lord. In
this service he has been going on year after year. In a measure his
labors had been blessed up to the period of the last Report, but far
more abundantly since, as the following account, given by himself to me
in a letter dated Oct. 28, 1859, will show:--

"This month, through which we have passed, has brought me to a point in
my history which for years I have contemplated and looked forward to
with deeper and more intense desire than to any anticipated event in my
whole life. More than thirty years ago there sprang up in my soul a
longing and craving for the effusion of the Holy Ghost on the church and
on the world, such as would extend throughout the whole of Scotland. For
this I have labored, and spoken, and prayed increasingly. As I grew
older, the craving for this blessing grew stronger. To see it became the
ruling passion of my soul, and, as years rolled away, my hope of seeing
it realized strengthened apace. On this season of expected blessing we
seem at length to have entered. The religious movement is creeping
steadily along the whole of the west of Scotland. It has not acquired a
sudden or very powerful momentum. We are, so far as I can judge, in the
initiatory stage in all the points where the work has found a
settlement. A sound has gone out as from the Lord; the rumor travels on,
and in its course awakens the careless, opens the ear, quickens the
attention, and everywhere is making preparation for something coming.
This note of preparation is calling the people together. Their ear is
open to listen. In every place this hearing is bringing faith in its
train; men are turning to God; intensity is given to those silent cases
of conviction where for months or years there has been concern ebbing
and flowing with circumstances. Not a few of these have come to light
through their concern all at once ripening into deep distress. Forced
out of the old ruts in which they have moved, they are forced to venture
their all into the hands of Jesus, and are set at liberty. Such has been
the process at work here. I am continually falling in with solitary
cases, and a number of these have found peace. It would take far more
time than I can spare to record their history, and how they obtained
deliverance."

The total amount of the funds of the Institution which has been spent on
missionary operations since March 5, 1834, is £34,495, 3s. 4d.

There has been laid out for tracts and books, from May 26, 1859, to May
26, 1860, the sum of £1,650, 11s. 4¾d.; and there have been
circulated within the last year 2,562,001 tracts and books. The sum
total which has been expended on this object, since Nov. 19, 1840,
amounts to £8,064, 12s. 6½d. The total number of all the tracts and
books which have been circulated since Nov. 19, 1840, is 11,493,174.

During the past year there were again circulated 676,600 tracts and
books more than during the year before. The great number of laborers for
God who have been raised up for service within the last two years in
various parts of the world, and the mighty working of the Spirit of God,
which has created in multitudes a desire gladly to receive tracts and
books, account for this. Nor is there in these two particulars a
decrease, but a continual increase. So great has been the call for
tracts that of late we have sent out repeatedly 100,000 in one week, for
gratuitous circulation, and sometimes even more than this. When the
mighty working of the Spirit of God commenced in Ireland, I sought from
the beginning to send very large supplies of tracts to Belfast and
elsewhere, in order that thus the holy flame might be fanned, as it
were, and that in the very outset the simplicity of the gospel might be
set before the young converts. About two millions of the tracts and
books circulated during the past year were given away _gratuitously_.
Hundreds of believers have been engaged in spreading them abroad, not
merely in many parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland, but in various
other parts of the world.

At the commencement of the last period, there were 672 orphans in the
new Orphan Houses No. 1 and No. 2. During the past year were admitted
into the two houses 70 orphans. On May 26, 1860, there were just 700
orphans under our care, our full number in the two houses, _i. e._ in
No. 1, 300, in No. 2, 400. The total number of orphans who have been
under our care since April 11, 1836, is 1,153.

_Without any one having been personally applied to for anything_ by me,
the sum of £133,528, 14s. has been given to me for the orphans, _as the
result of prayer to God_, since the commencement of the work, which sum
includes the amount received for the building fund for the houses
already built and the one to be built. It may also be interesting to the
reader to know that the total amount which has been given for the other
objects since the commencement of the work amounts to £51,777, 14s.
11d.; and that which has come in by the sale of Bibles, since the
commencement, amounts to £2,530, 4s. 5½d.; by sale of tracts, £3,546,
19s. 1¼d.; and by the payments of the children in the day schools,
from the commencement, £2,304, 18s. 9d. Besides this, also, a great
variety and number of articles of clothing, furniture, provisions, etc.,
have been given _for the use_ of the orphans.

Day after day, and year after year, by the help of God, we labor in
prayer for the spiritual benefit of the orphans under our care. These
our supplications, which have been for twenty-four years brought before
the Lord concerning them, have been abundantly answered in former years
in the conversion of hundreds from among them. We have also had repeated
seasons in which, within a short time, or even all at once, _many_ of
the orphans were converted. Such a season we had about three years
since, when within a few days about sixty were brought to believe in the
Lord Jesus; and such seasons we have had again twice during the past
year. The first was in July, 1859, when the Spirit of God wrought so
mightily in one school of 120 girls, as that very many, yea, more than
one half, were brought under deep concern about the salvation of their
souls. This work, moreover, was not a mere momentary excitement; but,
after more than eleven months have elapsed, there are 31 concerning whom
there is _full_ confidence as to their conversion, and 32 concerning
whom there is likewise a goodly measure of confidence, though not to the
same amount as regarding the 31. There are therefore 63 out of the 120
orphans in that one school who are considered to have been converted in
July, 1859. This blessed and mighty work of the Holy Spirit cannot be
traced to any particular cause. It was, however, a most precious answer
to prayer. As such we look upon it, and are encouraged by it to further
waiting upon God. The second season of the mighty working of the Holy
Spirit among the orphans, during the past year, was at the end of
January and the beginning of February, 1860. The particulars of it are
of the deepest interest. A very profitable pamphlet might be written on
the subject. I have prayed again and again for guidance how to act, and
have at last come to the decision _not_ to relate the details, lest the
dear children, who would recognize themselves in the description, should
be injured; for my experience of laboring twenty-six years among
children, and of having had to deal with so _many very young believers_,
has led me to the full conviction _that it is injurious to make them
prominent_. If God makes them prominent by using them as evidently he is
using children in these days, we have only to admire and to praise; but
this is very different from ourselves making them prominent. I must
therefore content myself by stating that this great work of the Spirit
of God in January and February, 1860, began among the younger class of
the children under our care, little girls of about six, seven, eight,
and nine years old; then extended to the older girls, and then to the
boys; so that within about ten days above 200 of the orphans were
stirred up to be anxious about their souls, and in _many_ instances
found peace _immediately_, through faith in our Lord Jesus. They at once
requested to be allowed to hold prayer meetings among themselves, and
have had these meetings ever since. Many of them also manifested a
concern about the salvation of their companions and relations, and spoke
or wrote to them about the way to be saved. Should the believing reader
desire to know how it has been with these children since the end of
January and the beginning of February, our reply is, we have, in most
cases, cause for thankfulness. The present state of the 700 orphans,
spiritually, is, that there are 118 under our care, regarding whose
conversion we have full confidence; 89 regarding whom we have also
confidence, though not to that full degree as concerning the 118; and 53
whom we consider in a hopeful state. To these 260 are to be added the 14
who were sent out as believers, and the three who died in the faith
during the past year. It is to be remembered that very many of the
children in the Orphan Houses are quite young, as we have received them
from four months old and upward. During no year have we had greater
cause for thanksgiving on account of the spiritual blessing among the
children than during the last; AND YET WE LOOK FOR FURTHER AND GREATER
BLESSING STILL.




APPENDIX.


Mr. Müller is constantly receiving not only contributions in money, but
a great variety of useful articles, which are regularly sent to a shop
provided for their sale. The following list of such articles, given
anonymously during the first six months of the year 1859-60, will not be
without interest to the reader, as showing by what an endless diversity
of means resources are furnished for the work in which Mr. M. is
engaged:--

    JUNE. A bead bag, a bouquet-holder, 6 gilt brooches, a gilt
    bracelet, a waist-buckle, and an agate heart.--5 pairs of
    knitted travelling shoes, a compass and thermometer, a
    court-plaster case, a guinea piece, 2 half franc pieces, a
    copper coin, 4 rings, a brooch, a gold pencil-case, a pair of
    earrings, top of a seal, and a gold waist-buckle.--A silver
    watch guard; a small brooch, a breastpin, and a ring.--12 pairs
    of garters.--A sofa tidy.--A small stereoscopic box. 6 frocks, 6
    shirts, 4 pocket handkerchiefs, 2 pairs of socks, 2 nightcaps,
    12 kettle-holders, 2 pairs of wristlets, 4 thimbles, 2 brooches,
    steel slides, a bracelet, and waist-buckle. A bead mat, 2 bags,
    a penwiper, 3 book-marks, and a scent-bag.--A pencil, 2 pairs of
    spectacles, a smelling-bottle, a pocketbook, some gloves,
    stockings, combs, and various articles of clothing, etc.,
    together with a half-sovereign.

    JULY. An old silver watch, an old metal watch, and an old
    shilling.--2 coats, 1 jacket, one waistcoat, 1 pair of trousers,
    and 1 pair of garters. 5 dresses, a body, and 2 shillings.--9
    penwipers, 4 babies' shirts, 9 mats, 1 pair of baby's boots, 2
    nightcaps, 6 pinafores, 2 pairs of watch pockets, 1 ribbon mat,
    1 pincushion, 2 needlebooks, and 3 book-markers.--2 dolls, 2
    dolls' hats, a pair of bracelets, a pincushion, a needlebook, a
    shaving cloth, a sampler, 2 pairs of cuffs, a kettle-holder, a
    penwiper, a pair of baby's shoes, a book-mark, a bag, a
    watch-guard, a pinafore, and a pamphlet.--2 buckles, a
    smelling-bottle, some mock pearls, 3 hair bracelets, a hair
    ring, and a wig.

    AUGUST. Some fancy envelopes.--A ring, 2 shirt studs, and a
    watch-hook.--A pattern for a collar.--A ring from Stroud.--12
    new bonnets.--A brooch, a bracelet, a book-marker, some cuffs, a
    pattern for work, and some trimming.--A frame for ladies'
    work.--"From the friend at Devizes," 2 skirts of dresses, a
    jacket, and a shawl.--Some pencil lead for polishing.--Some
    knitting and sewing cotton.--2 old wedding rings.--3 balls.--8
    book-marks, 4 postage-stamp cases, and 6 pincushions.

    SEPTEMBER. A parcel containing some worsted, some brass
    thimbles, bodkins, and needles.--4 black ostrich feathers, 1
    white ditto, 4 colored drawings.--3 pairs of socks, 6 pairs of
    stockings, and 2 waistcoats.--A pair of patent renovators (or
    flesh gloves).--A small work-bag of silk and straw.--A guinea
    piece, a lace habit shirt, a pair of lace sleeves, and a French
    cambric handkerchief.--3 collars, 1 pocket handkerchief, and 1
    pair of sleeves.--2 flannel petticoats, a table cover, a silver
    wine-strainer, a silver marrow spoon, 1 sugar spoon, a punch
    ladle, 6 chemises, and 6 pinafores.--A small hamper of books.--1
    alpaca coat, 1 check waistcoat, 1 pair of trousers, 3 pairs of
    shoes, 1 travelling cap, 1 pair of spectacles in case, 2 pairs
    of boots, 2 muffetees, 1 pair of gaiters, 1 pair of boots, 8
    copper pens, 1 pair of slippers, 1 black leather bag, 1 pair of
    new boots, 1 coat, 1 waistcoat, 5 pairs of gloves, 1 pair of
    braces, a necktie, a dressing box, 2 brushes, 3 razors, a
    stiletto, a pair of spectacles, and 2 pieces of teeth set in
    gold.--12 book covers, 7 small ditto, 1 small box, 4 ditto in
    one.--A large box of toys.--A collar.--A large tea chest,
    containing 160 articles of ladies' dress, etc.--A dress, 3
    bodies, 3 berthas, a waistband, a pair of cuffs, a feather, an
    ornament for the hair, some artificial flowers, some whalebone,
    and some pieces of ribbon.--A cloth mantle, a velvet jacket, and
    a muslin ditto.

    OCTOBER. 3 pairs of crotchet ladies' slippers, and 1 pair of
    child's ditto.--A pair of gilt bracelets, a collar, a pair of
    cuffs, and a pair of worked sleeves.--2 paper mats, a bead
    ditto, a plaister case, 3 needlebooks, 5 small cushions, 4
    pincushions, 2 penwipers, a book-mark, 2 little baskets, a
    little bag, a doll, a pair of candlestick ornaments, and 6
    napkin rings. The parcel also contained 5s. from
    "Hephzibah."--An urn-stand, a bag, and a mat.--A collar.--6
    pence purses.--3 dolls' bonnets.--"A Canadian lady's purse."--9
    pairs of boots, 3 pairs of shoes, and a single boot, all new.

    NOVEMBER. A box containing 5 bonnets, 2 muslin jackets, 1 silk
    ditto, 1 silk body, 3 muslin dresses, 1 silk ditto, 1 barege
    skirt, 18 pairs of fine stockings, 17 pairs of coarse ditto, 3
    pairs of boots, 3 stockings, 10 chemises, 3 pairs of drawers, 5
    nightdresses, some pieces of ribbon, and a few artificial
    flowers.--6 pairs of night socks.--A riding habit, a box, a silk
    body, some velvet trimming, some satin ditto, 2 waistbands, some
    fringe, some satin ribbon, a feather, a scarf, a veil, and a
    pair of woollen sleeves.--3 silver coins.--A silver tablespoon,
    some satin trimming, and a frill.--4 dresses, a skirt, a jacket,
    3 children's skirts, and 2 frocks.--A small gold pencil-case, a
    gold breastpin, and a pair of small gold earrings.--A collar.--3
    antimacassars, and a baby's cap.--2 silver coins, and a pair of
    silver shirt studs.--7 boys' shirts.--A jacket and a feather.--A
    jacket, a pair of drawers, 2 chemises, 2 nightcaps, 5 skirts,
    and 1 body.--4 pairs of new boots, and 2 pairs of new shoes.--A
    crumb scraper.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Müller, as a faithful steward, renders an annual account of all the
sums intrusted to him. Appended (p. 476) is the "Auditor's Report" for
1859-60, showing the total amount in hand for the year, including the
building fund, to have been £72,188, 16s. 5¾d.--almost _three hundred
and fifty thousand dollars_. Mr. M. says:--

    The audited accounts, together with the books containing the
    income and expenses, may be inspected by the donors. I
    particularly state this, because I do not publish a list of the
    donors, nor do I mention their names otherwise, in order that
    there may not be held out the least temptation of giving for the
    sake of worldly applause; but, at the same time, as I do this
    work in the light, it can bear the light, and therefore any
    donor can satisfy himself, if he please, that his donation is
    accounted for.

    To avoid mistakes, delays, and other difficulties, I would
    request that all letters for me should be directed to my house,
    No. 21, Paul Street, Kingsdown, Bristol.

          GEORGE MÜLLER.

          BRISTOL, July 2, 1860.


 THE INCOME AND EXPENSES OF THE INSTITUTION FOR 1859-60.

 =======================================================================
 The Income of the first           | The Expenses of the first
 four objects from May 26, 1859,   | four objects from May 26, 1859,
 to May 26, 1860.                  | to May 26, 1860.
 ----------------------------------+------------------------------------
                         £  s.  d. |                         £  s.  d.
 By balance in hand on             | For all the schools    515  4  4
     May 26, 1859     2,009 11  2½ |  "  Bibles             398  3  7
 " Donations          7,029 14 10  |  "  missionary
 " Sale of articles                |       purposes       5,019  6  1
    given for                      |
    the purpose          35 17  7  |  "  tracts           1,650 11  4¾
 " Sale of tracts       636  2  9¾ |  "  stationery           2 14  8
 " Sale of Bibles       152  8  9  |  "  postage             32 17  5
 " Payments of the                 | Balance in hand on
   children in the day             |   May 26, 1860       2,392  2  2½
   schools               97  4  6  |
                     ------ -- --  |                     ------ -- --
                    £10,010 19  8¼ |                    £10,010 19  8¼


 =======================================================================
 The Income for the orphans, from  | The Expenses for the orphans, from
 May 26, 1859, to May 26, 1860.    |  May 26, 1859, to May 26, 1860.
 ----------------------------------+------------------------------------
                          £  s. d. |                           £  s. d.
 ----------------------------------+------------------------------------
 By balance in hand                | Current expen's in
   on May 26, 1859,    7,461 19 1  |   connection with the
 " donations in money  8,714  6 2½ |   Orphan Houses.       7,255 17  6
 " sale of articles                | For the Apprentices      200  5  4½
     given for the                 |  "  18,000 copies of the
     purpose            570 13  6½ |     Twentieth Report     179  3  0
 " sale of Reports      173 18  3  |  "  postage and carriage
 " cash paid on behalf             |       of boxes
    of orphans,         137  5  4  |       and parcels         57  1  6½
                                   |  "  stationery             7  6  6½
                                   | Balance in hand on
                                   |   May 26, 1860         9,858  8  5½
                     ------ -- --  |                       ------ -- --
                    £17,058  2  5  |                      £17,058  2  5


 ===================================================================~~
 Income for the Building Fund, from May 26, 1859, to May 26, 1860. |
 ------------------------------------------------------------------+~~
                                                    £  s. d.       |
 By amount received up to May 26, 1859          41,911 15 11       |
  " Donations in money                           1,964  6  3½      |
  " Sale of grass and rent of the field,                           |
     March 25, 1859, to March 25, 1861              72  0  0       |
  " Interest                                     1,120 14  5       |
  " Drawbacks of property tax                       44 17  9       |
                                                ------ -- --       |
                                               £45,113 14  4½      |

 ~===================================================================
   |  Expenditure in connection with the Building Fund.
 ~-+-----------------------------------------------------------------
   |                                                        £  s. d.
   |  Expended up to May 26, 1859                       21,402 18 10
   |     "     for additional furniture, etc.,
   |             on the new Orphan House, No. 2.            49  0  9½
   |     "     on the building of the
   |             new Orphan House, No. 3                 2,379  4  9
   |  Balance in hand on May 26, 1860                   21,282 10  0
   |                                                    ------ -- --
   |                                                   £45,113 14  4½

We have examined these accounts and find them correct.

                                    RICHARD BALL.  ROBERT H. RICHARDS.
                                         SAMUEL BUTLER. JOHN MEREDITH.

  BRISTOL, JUNE 22, 1860.


       *       *       *       *       *


VALUABLE WORKS

PUBLISHED BY

GOULD AND LINCOLN,

59 WASHINGTON STREET, BOSTON.


THE CHRISTIAN LIFE; SOCIAL AND INDIVIDUAL. By PETER BAYNE, M. A. 12mo,
cloth, $1.25.

    There is but one voice respecting this extraordinary book,--men
    of all denominations, in all quarters, agree in pronouncing it
    one of the most admirable works of the age.

MODERN ATHEISM; Under its forms of Pantheism, Materialism, Secularism,
Development, and Natural Laws. By JAMES BUCHANAN, D. D., L. L. D. 12mo,
cloth, $1.25.

    "The work is one of the most readable and solid which we have
    ever perused."--_Hugh Miller in the Witness._

NEW ENGLAND THEOCRACY. From the German of Uhden's History of the
Congregationalists of New England, with an INTRODUCTION BY NEANDER. By
MRS. H. C. CONANT, author of "The English Bible," etc. 12mo, cloth,
$1.00.

    A work of rare ability and interest, presenting the early
    religious and ecclesiastical history of New England, from
    authentic sources, with singular impartiality. The author
    evidently aimed throughout to do exact justice to the dominant
    party, and all their opponents of every name. The standpoint
    from which the whole subject is viewed is novel, and we have in
    this volume a new and most important contribution to Puritan
    History.

THE MISSION OF THE COMFORTER; with copious Notes. By JULIUS CHARLES
HARE. With the Notes translated for the AMERICAN EDITION. 12mo, cloth,
$1.25.

THE BETTER LAND; or, The Believer's Journey and Future Home. By the Rev.
A. C. THOMPSON. 12mo, cloth, 85 cts.

    A most charming and instructive book for all now journeying to
    the "Better Land."

THE EVENING OF LIFE; or, Light and Comfort amidst the Shadows of
Declining Years. By REV. JEREMIAH CHAPLIN, D. D. A new Revised, and much
enlarged edition. With an elegant Frontispiece on Steel. 12mo, cloth,
$1.00.

    [pointing finger graphic] A most charming and appropriate work for
    the aged,--large type and open page. An admirable "Gift" for the
    child to present the parent.

THE STATE OF THE IMPENITENT DEAD. By ALVAH HOVEY, D. D., Prof. of
Christian Theology in Newton Theol. Inst. 16mo, cloth, 50 cts.

A WREATH AROUND THE CROSS; or, Scripture Truths Illustrated. By the Rev.
A. MORTON BROWN, D. D. Recommendatory Preface, by JOHN ANGELL JAMES.
With a beautiful Frontispiece. 16mo, cloth, 60 cts.

    "'Christ, and Him crucified' is presented in a new, striking,
    and matter-of-fact light. The style is simple, without being
    puerile, and the reasoning is of that truthful, persuasive kind
    that 'comes from the heart, and reaches the heart.'"--_N. Y.
    Observer._




VALUABLE WORKS.


THE PURITANS; or the Court, Church, and Parliament of England, during
the reigns of Edward VI. and Elizabeth. By SAMUEL HOPKINS, author of
"Lessons at the Cross," etc. In 3 vols. Vol. I. _now ready_. Octavo,
cloth, per vol., $2.50.

  VOL. II. READY IN FEBRUARY,                 "       "    "    "   $2.50.

    It will be found the most interesting and reliable History of
    the Puritans yet published, narrating in a dramatic style many
    facts hitherto unknown.


LIMITS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT EXAMINED, in Eight Lectures delivered in the
Oxford University Pulpit, in the year 1858, on the "Bampton Foundation."
By Rev. H. LONGUEVILLE MANSEL, B. D., Reader in Moral and Metaphysical
Philosophy at Magdalen College, Oxford, and Editor of Sir William
Hamilton's Lectures. With the Copious NOTES TRANSLATED for the American
Ed. 12mo, cloth, $1.00.

    This volume is destined to create a profounder sensation in this
    country than any philosophical or religious work of this
    century. It is a defence of revealed religion, equal in ability
    to the "Analogy" of Bishop Butler, and meets the scepticism of
    our age as effectually as that great work in an earlier day. The
    Pantheism and Parkerism infused into our popular literature will
    here find an antidote. The Lectures excited the highest
    enthusiasm at Oxford, and the Volume has already reached a
    _third_ edition in England. The copious "Notes" of the author
    having been translated for the American edition by an
    accomplished scholar, adds greatly to its value.


THE HISTORICAL EVIDENCES OF THE TRUTH OF THE SCRIPTURE RECORDS, STATED
ANEW, with Special Reference to the Doubts and Discoveries of Modern
Times. In Eight Lectures, delivered in the Oxford University pulpit, at
the Bampton Lecture for 1859. By GEO. RAWLINSON, M.A., Editor of the
Histories of Herodotus. With the Copious NOTES TRANSLATED for the
_American Edition_ by an accomplished scholar. 12mo, cloth, $1.00.


SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON'S LECTURES ON LOGIC. With Notes from Original
Materials, and an Appendix containing the Latest Development of his New
Logical Theory. Edited by Prof. H. LONGUEVILLE MANSEL, Oxford, and JOHN
VEITCH, M. A., Edinburgh. Royal octavo, cloth, $3.00. (_In press._)


MORAL PHILOSOPHY, including Theoretical and Practical Ethics. By JOSEPH
HAVEN, D. D., late Professor of Moral and Intellectual Philosophy in
Amherst College; author of "Mental Philosophy." Royal 12mo, cloth,
embossed, $1.25.

    It is eminently scientific in method, and thorough in
    discussion, and its views on unsettled questions in morals are
    discriminating and sound. It treats largely of Political
    Ethics--a department of morals of great importance to American
    youth, but generally overlooked in text-books. In the history of
    ethical opinions it is unusually rich and elaborate.


POPULAR GEOLOGY; With Descriptive Sketches from a Geologist's Portfolio.
By Hugh Miller. With a Resume of the Progress of Geological Science
during the last two years. By MRS. MILLER. 12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    This work is likely to prove the most popular of Hugh Miller's
    writings, and to attain the widest circulation. It is written in
    his best style, and makes the mysteries of Geology intelligible
    to the common mind. As an architect explains the structure of a
    house from cellar to attic, so this accomplished geologist takes
    the globe to pieces, and explains the manner in which all its
    strata have been formed, from the granite foundation to the
    alluvial surface. It supplies just the information which many
    readers have been longing for, but unable to find. Also,


HUGH MILLER'S WORKS. Seven volumes, uniform style, in an elegant box,
embossed cloth, $8.25; library sheep, $10.00; half calf, $14.00;
antique, $14.00.


MANSEL'S MISCELLANIES; including "Prolegomina Logica," "Metaphysics,"
"Limits of Demonstrative Evidence," "Philosophy of Kant," etc. 12mo,
cloth, (_In press._)




WORKS FOR CHURCH MEMBERS.

THE CHRISTIAN'S DAILY TREASURY; a Religious Exercise for every Day in
the Year. By Rev. E. TEMPLE. A new and improved edition. 12 mo, cloth,
$1.00.

    [pointing finger graphic] A work for every Christian. It
    is indeed a "Treasury" of good things.


THE SCHOOL OF CHRIST; or, Christianity Viewed in its Leading Aspects. By
the Rev. A. R. L. FOOTE, author of "Incidents in the Life of our
Saviour," etc. 16 mo, cloth, 50 cts.


THE CHRISTIAN PASTOR; His Work and the Needful Preparation. By ALVAN
HOVEY, D. D., Prof. of Theology in the Newton Theol. Inst. 16 mo, pp.
60; flexible cloth, 25 cents; paper covers, 12 cents.


APOLLOS; or, Directions to Persons just commencing a Religious Life. 32
mo, paper covers, cheap, for distribution, per hundred, $6.00.


THE HARVEST AND THE REAPERS. Home Work for All, and how to do it. By
Rev. HARVEY NEWCOMB. 16 mo, cloth, 63 cts.

    This work is dedicated to the converts of 1858. It shows what
    _may_ be done, by showing what has been done. It shows how much
    there is now to be done at home. It shows how to do it. Every
    man interested in the work of saving men, every professing
    Christian, will find this work to be for him.


THE CHURCH-MEMBER'S MANUAL of Ecclesiastical Principles, Doctrines, and
Discipline. By Rev. WILLIAM CROWELL, D. D. Introduction by H. J. RIPLEY,
D. D. Second edition, revised and improved. 12 mo, cloth, 75 cts.


THE CHURCH-MEMBER'S HAND-BOOK; a Plain Guide to the Doctrines and
Practice of Baptist Churches. By the Rev. WILLIAM CROWELL, D. D. 18 mo,
cloth, 38 cts.


THE CHURCH-MEMBER'S GUIDE. By the Rev. JOHN A. JAMES. Edited by J. O.
CHOULES, D. D. New edition. With Introductory Essay, by Rev. HUBBARD
WINSLOW. Cloth, 33 cts.

    "The spontaneous effusion of our heart, on laying the book down,
    was: 'May every church, member in our land possess this book,
    and be blessed with all the happiness which conformity to its
    evangelical sentiments and directions is calculated to
    confer.'"--_Christian Secretary._


THE CHURCH IN EARNEST. By Rev. JOHN A. JAMES. 18 mo, cloth, 40 cts.

    "Its arguments and appeals are well adapted to prompt to action,
    and the times demand such a book. We trust it will be
    universally read."--_N. Y. Observer._

    "Those who have the means should purchase a number of copies of
    this work, and lend them to church-members, and keep them in
    circulation _till they are worn out_!"--_Mothers' Assistant._


CHRISTIAN PROGRESS. A Sequel to the Anxious Inquirer. By JOHN ANGELL
JAMES. 18 mo, cloth, 31 cts.

    [pointing finger graphic] One of the best and most useful
    works of this popular author.

    "It ought to be sold by hundreds of thousands, until every
    church-member in the land has bought, read, marked, learned, and
    inwardly digested a copy."--_Congregationalist._

    "So eminently is it adapted to do good, that we feel no surprise
    that it should make one of the publishers' excellent
    publications. It exhibits the whole subject of growth in grace
    with great simplicity and clearness."--_Puritan Recorder._

       *       *       *       *       *

GOULD AND LINCOLN

59 WASHINGTON STREET, BOSTON,

Would call particular attention to the following valuable works described
in their Catalogue of Publications, viz.:


 Hugh Miller's Works.
 Bayne's Works.
 Walker's Works.
 Miall's Works.
 Bungener's Work.
 Annual of Scientific Discovery.
 Knight's Knowledge is Power.
 Krummacher's Suffering Saviour.
 Banvard's American Histories.
 The Aimwell Stories.
 Newcomb's Works.
 Tweedie's Works.
 Chambers's Works.
 Harris' Works.
 Kitto's Cyclopædia of Biblical Literature.
 Mrs. Knight's Life of Montgomery.
 Kitto's History of Palestine.
 Whewell's Work.
 Wayland's Works.
 Agassiz's Works.
 Williams' Works.
 Guyot's Works.
 Thompson's Better Land.
 Kimball's Heaven.
 Valuable Works on Missions.
 Haven's Mental Philosophy.
 Buchanan's Modern Atheism.
 Cruden's Condensed Concordance.
 Eadie's Analytical Concordance.
 The Psalmist: a Collection of Hymns.
 Valuable School Books.
 Works for Sabbath Schools.
 Memoir of Amos Lawrence.
 Poetical Works of Milton, Cowper, Scott.
 Elegant Miniature Volumes.
 Arvine's Cyclopædia of Anecdotes.
 Ripley's Notes on Gospels, Acts, and Romans.
 Sprague's European Celebrities.
 Marsh's Camel and the Hallig.
 Roget's Thesaurus of English Words.
 Hackett's Notes on Acts.
 M'Whorter's Yahveh Christ.
 Siebold and Stannius's Comparative Anatomy.
 Maroon's Geological Map, U.S.
 Religious and Miscellaneous Works.
 Works in the various Departments of Literature, Science and Art.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including obsolete and variant spellings. Obvious
typographical errors in punctuation (misplaced quotes and the like) have
been fixed. Corrections [in brackets] in the text are noted below:

throughout:

    It is possible that the same name is spelled variously: Franke;
    Francke; Franké. The names have been left as in the original.

page 203: typo corrected

    the Lord Jesus. Even about the commencment[commencement] of this
    century, when there was almost universal darkness or even

page 302: typo corrected

    with a sufficiently large piece of ground in the
    neghborhood[neighborhood] of Bristol, for building the premises

page 342: possible typo corrected

    from among the sunday[Sunday]-school children were, during these
    two years, received into church fellowship. The

page 399: possible typo corrected

    added to the _present_ building fund, so that on the evening of
    May 26, 1852, I had altogether £3,530, 9s. 0-1/4[d].

page 408: possible typo corrected

    and unbelief prevails. How different, if one is enabled to
    wait's[wait] God's own time, and to look alone to him for help





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Trust: Being a Narrative
of the Lord's Dealings With George Müller, by George Müller

